[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other day. I dreamed that while browsing in a bookshop, I ran into
[Amit Varma]: the me of 1990 from 30 years ago. He's 16 years old. I'm 46. He was walking around in
[Amit Varma]: the street in 1990 and walks into this bookstore, which magically also has another door leading
[Amit Varma]: out to 2020. The poor lad is bewildered by the books here. I watch him barely as he opens
[Amit Varma]: one book to that early page in which the date of publishing is written. And then he steps
[Amit Varma]: back in shock and horror. He turns around to see who else is there. But I'm the only
[Amit Varma]: one there. Our eyes meet, but he doesn't know he is me 30 years later. No doubt he imagines
[Amit Varma]: his future self differently. And as I now remember, he also imagines his present self
[Amit Varma]: differently from what it is. I look at him with jealousy. He's so slim with all his life
[Amit Varma]: ahead of him. I look at him with revulsion. I remember who I was my anxieties and my prejudices,
[Amit Varma]: my unearned arrogance, my foolish vanity. I look at him with pity. He will take so long
[Amit Varma]: to learn so little and then it might be too late. And meanwhile, the poor lad is trapped
[Amit Varma]: in the future. As I am lost in these thoughts, I see him turn around and walk towards me.
[Amit Varma]: I recoil in horror because at that moment, as his young eyes meet mine, it strikes me
[Unknown]: that he is less of a stranger to me than I am to myself. Welcome to the scene and the
[Unknown]: unseen. Our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science. Please welcome your
[Amit Varma]: host Amit Verma. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. I'm often amazed by how much the
[Amit Varma]: world has changed in the last 30 years, perhaps more than in any other 30 year span in history.
[Amit Varma]: Technology, social media, globalization have all transformed our society. We normalize
[Amit Varma]: change so quickly. So yesterday's miracle is often today's banal. Yesterday's magic
[Amit Varma]: is today's science. So some of us don't even realize how much we have changed and are changing.
[Amit Varma]: I explored some of this territory in episode 137 of the scene and the unseen in which the
[Amit Varma]: great columnist Santosh Desai shared his insights on the changes in our society in the last
[Amit Varma]: 30 years. And my guest today is Paromita Vora, another columnist who never fails to take
[Amit Varma]: me deeper into myself. So much of her work makes me look at the familiar with new eyes
[Amit Varma]: and new eyes. In fact, is a theme of some of her work. Paromita has made films, written
[Amit Varma]: many columns, created installations and open minds. Also, she brings to all her work a
[Amit Varma]: lens that is different from the male gaze of men with beards, as she calls them, which
[Amit Varma]: misses as much as it sees. And as the show is called the scene and the unseen, how could
[Amit Varma]: I have a better guest on it than Paromita? Welcome to the show, Paro.
[Guest]: Hi, thank you.
[Amit Varma]: So, Paro, before we sort of get down to your work and all the weighty themes of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about yourself. What's your journey like? What did the seven-year-old
[Amit Varma]: Paro want to be?
[Guest]: I think I wanted to be a librarian when I was seven years old. I seem to remember that.
[Guest]: Which is a little bit like a drunk wanting to own an alcohol shop, right? I just I wanted
[Guest]: unlimited access to books like many of us at that age in that era.
[Guest]: Where was this? Where were you born and brought up?
[Guest]: I was born in Pune, but I was brought up in many different places because my father was
[Guest]: in the Air Force. And in fact, one of the things wherever I went was to find the local
[Guest]: lending library and become a member. And when I was seven, we were actually posted in Hyderabad
[Guest]: in Sikandarabad, which is a beautiful cantonment town and full of a sense of Enid Blyton like
[Guest]: mystery. Because, you know, since it's a cantonment town, it still has all those old colonial
[Guest]: buildings with very high ceilings. And I don't know if there's a secret passage behind this
[Guest]: room and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: All famous five and five letters.
[Guest]: And my brain was definitely chock full of having read all that stuff. And I wanted more
[Guest]: than anything to have a secret club, except I didn't have too many friends. And there
[Guest]: was a very old colonial club called the Sikandarabad Club, and it had a separate room, which was
[Guest]: a children's library, like almost like a little house inside some what felt like a forest
[Guest]: to me. When I saw it as a grown up, I was like, oh, it's just a few plants. And there
[Guest]: was a very elderly or seemed elderly to me at that time, Anglo Indian lady who ran the
[Guest]: library. I was a bit scared of her, but she sort of took to this funny kid who would come
[Guest]: every day. Every day I would go to the library for a new book, right?
[Guest]: Were you the only kid who would go every day?
[Guest]: I think I was the only kid who used to go to the library, maybe. I mean, there was a
[Guest]: shelf of Nancy Drew's and Hardy Boys and you know, that sort of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And you read both.
[Guest]: So I read both. I read all very quickly. And I might have been the only kid who was reading
[Guest]: the other books in the library, right? And she was very sweet. I was scared of her, but
[Guest]: now when I look back, she was very sweet, always looking for books to give me. And I
[Guest]: guess this was my idea of heaven as an odd child who didn't have a lot of friends, who
[Guest]: was a little peculiar and a bit of a misfit. So I obviously felt like when I grow up, if
[Amit Varma]: I'm a librarian, I'll always be at home.
[Amit Varma]: And what is that kind of moment where you discover a different kind of literature from
[Amit Varma]: the children's literature? Like I remember for me, it was like I was very privileged
[Amit Varma]: in the sense my father had thousands of books at home. And one day I stumbled upon a book
[Amit Varma]: titled The House of the Dead. And of course, it seemed like a nice adventure book. And
[Amit Varma]: I picked it up. And it was Dostoevsky's account of his time in prison in Siberia. And I was
[Amit Varma]: completely hooked. So that's kind of, you know, I can remember that as a moment that
[Amit Varma]: changed everything for me. Was it a similar sort of?
[Guest]: So I mean, I don't have such a precise memory, but I do think that this voraciousness is
[Guest]: a way that you, like your life changes because your appetite is constantly leading you to
[Guest]: look for more and more things. And my parents had a lot of books and all the books used
[Guest]: to be kept in the study room, which had the television. So and you didn't really, I mean,
[Guest]: back in the 70s, you watch TV once a week for the Sunday movie or Chitrahaar or whatever.
[Guest]: So that room itself used to feel like a mystery room because you didn't go in there very often.
[Guest]: Nobody was staying in that room. And that bookshelf, once I'd finished all my books,
[Guest]: I obviously would keep looking. I must confess that the book I remember most was some kind
[Guest]: of a porno I found, I think. But yes. And then I got caught reading it and got whacked
[Guest]: also. But I mean, I think the first grownup book that I remember reading, though I don't
[Guest]: remember the book now, was Of Mice and Men. And I do think there's something fantastic
[Guest]: about reading something you don't really get. But knowing, you know, there is something
[Guest]: to get here. You know, there is that feeling of mystery and excitement and adventure and
[Guest]: gives you something to look forward to and push towards that I want to become the person
[Guest]: who understands that book. And so you start looking for other books along the way. And
[Guest]: I think in the same way, a little bit later, we were posted in Baghdad. My dad was posted
[Guest]: in Baghdad. And there was a Kendra Vidyalaya there.
[Amit Varma]: Kendra Vidyalaya in Baghdad?
[Guest]: Yes. And in fact, you know, in the Kendra Vidyalaya, because I had studied in the South,
[Guest]: my Hindi was horrible. And I was like, I cannot study Sanskrit. Like Hindi is bad enough,
[Guest]: but now suddenly, so I cried and cried and I was somehow excused. And my Sanskrit teacher
[Guest]: refused to take that lying down. And she said, I'll give you extra classes in Sanskrit.
[Guest]: And I'm very grateful to her because Sanskrit is a pretty systematic language. And because
[Guest]: now I see that I'm a conceptual thinker, so I really took to it. And my Hindi teacher
[Guest]: was very upset because I got like 100 on 100 in Sanskrit and some 5 on 10 or whatever 50%
[Guest]: in Hindi. And she felt betrayed by all of this. But I feel that my teachers at that
[Guest]: time also, teachers take an interest in the odd kids who they feel are bookish. And my
[Guest]: teachers gave me many books. So I remember that my social studies teacher gave me Alex
[Guest]: Haley's Roots, when I must have been 11 or something. So again, while reading it, I of
[Guest]: course understood that book, it was not so hard to understand. But it was a little bit
[Guest]: more grown up than the stage I was at. But I think all of those things, yes, did help
[Guest]: me know that the world is a very complex and interesting and different place. And all the
[Guest]: places I'm not supposed to go are the places I should definitely go and check out.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it strikes me that back in those days, 70s, 80s, for a curious, imaginative Indian
[Amit Varma]: kid, which I also was in the 80s, I can remember there's really not much to do. You read books,
[Amit Varma]: if you're fortunate enough to have books available to you, read them. But today there is so much.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll ask you to take sort of a step out of yourself for a moment and imagine the seven
[Amit Varma]: year old Paromita or the 10 year old Paromita in today's times. Is she still reading as
[Amit Varma]: much? What is she doing? How is she driven?
[Guest]: I think a seven year old version of me probably would not exist very easily. Well, maybe they
[Guest]: do exist. I think I don't think that a seven year old today would be reading as much. But
[Guest]: I don't think that they're any different in terms of a sense of curiosity. In fact, you
[Guest]: know, the strange coexistence in India, especially of how on the one hand, kids are very separate
[Guest]: from adults. But on the other hand, they're all mixed up in adult life. I think it creates
[Guest]: a particular kind of condition. So I do think that seven year olds today are both very grown
[Guest]: up in some of the things they understand in ways that we certainly weren't. We were a
[Guest]: little bit more lost in the woods. But I think there is still a sense of mystery and science
[Guest]: that they're very interested in. I think certainly if I was seven today, I would be a little
[Guest]: bit more interested in doing experiments and learning how things work because YouTube is
[Guest]: the new library, right? I mean, the internet is a new library for kids. And I think they
[Guest]: are discovering varied things in it in their own way.
[Amit Varma]: Can we explore the thought a little bit further? Like when you talk about how adult life is
[Amit Varma]: much more interspersed with childhood life than it was then, is that in some ways maybe
[Amit Varma]: a threat to the innocence of childhood? Or what does it mean for the experience of childhood?
[Guest]: You know, I am not a fan of this innocence of childhood idea. I don't think that children
[Guest]: are any more or less innocent than anybody else. I mean, I perceive myself as a very
[Guest]: innocent person still. So I think innocence is a quality that all of us have. And some
[Guest]: of us hold on to it till we die. And some of us don't. And one of the reasons that we
[Guest]: don't is because innocence has a certain vulnerability involved, right? And when I say innocent,
[Guest]: I don't mean naive or unknowing of the world, right? But rather that you're willing to be
[Guest]: surprised, rather that you're willing to imagine, like, going to something anew.
[Amit Varma]: You're not jailed.
[Guest]: Yes. So one of my favorite pieces of writing actually is William Blake's songs of innocence
[Guest]: and experience. And for me, it was a very novel idea when I read it that, well, being
[Guest]: innocent is not the same as being good. To know and then be good is very different than
[Guest]: to be virtuous by not knowing anything and maintaining innocence, right? So I'm not using
[Guest]: innocence in that way, but I'm using it in the sense of being open and vulnerable and
[Guest]: going in with a childlike curiosity and willingness to be delighted by something.
[Guest]: That's why, you know, one of my dhaadiwala irritations is the way in which people speak
[Guest]: as if they already know everything.
[Guest]: Yeah, the men with beard syndrome you have often written about.
[Guest]: Yes, yes. And you know, Twitter has given so much play to that tendency. So somebody
[Guest]: will always say, oh, this is just happening because, you know, the liberal does this and
[Guest]: now the right wing is doing that and now this thing and that thing. And yeah, I don't disagree.
[Guest]: But I also feel that if we can so neatly wrap everything up, then there's nothing left to
[Guest]: really learn in the world. And that is never true. There's always something new happening
[Guest]: at every moment. And innocence requires being open to that possibility rather than saying
[Guest]: that I know what everything is.
[Guest]: I think the opposite of innocence is a kind of fear, which is if I don't already know
[Guest]: everything, then who am I? What am I? Like, you know, what's my role? So I think there
[Guest]: is that. But to go back to your question about the interspersing of adult and child, you
[Guest]: know, I think that it's actually not so much as it threatens children's innocence, but
[Guest]: it threatens their individuality. You know, the possibility of being bored, which is something
[Guest]: we are talking about as children, that you had to make your own entertainment. So you
[Guest]: kind of always were getting into places you were not supposed to. You inserted yourself
[Guest]: into adult life, tried to watch movies that were forbidden to you, tried to read your
[Guest]: parents' books, eavesdropped way too much on adult conversations in an effort to entertain
[Guest]: yourself as much as curiosity about what's forbidden. And I think today adults insert
[Guest]: themselves into children's lives too much. They want to pre-decide. And in a society
[Guest]: which already pre-decides so much, you know, in terms of our identity, so much is already
[Guest]: set out for the kind of life that we might end up having. Now there's an extra layer
[Guest]: of it that your kid is going to like, you know, parenting as an idea has taken hold
[Guest]: of middle-class India in a very big way. And especially with more nuclear families, the
[Guest]: tendency of parents to be involved in their children's lives to the extent where children
[Guest]: don't really have a strong sense of privacy, individuality, fallow time, a place basically
[Guest]: to become yourself. Because that's really what that time is, that you figure yourself
[Guest]: out as you go along, because nobody's really paying that much attention to you. And I think
[Guest]: paying too much attention to children is binding adults and children in some kind of an unhealthy
[Guest]: circle where, I mean, how do you also grow older if you're all the time in the role of
[Guest]: parenting, right? Because becoming older is also a pleasurable new experience. I can say
[Guest]: now that I'm growing older, it's because it's completely different. It's an unknown world.
[Amit Varma]: That really gives me hope because I'm terrified of it. And yet it's happening.
[Guest]: I think it's fantastic because you do change and you don't know you. You have the chance
[Guest]: to get to know yourself all over again in different phases of your life. And honestly,
[Guest]: the biggest romance you'll ever have in your life is with yourself. So this newness of
[Guest]: you and even the fact that you're slower or that you think differently, you don't automatically
[Guest]: know all the popular culture. I was terrified of this happening to me because I love popular
[Guest]: culture. And now that I don't automatically know all of it, it's actually pretty okay
[Guest]: because there are some new things that I know or some harder things that I want to do, that
[Guest]: I feel able to do. And this is all a kind of new discovery of myself and through that
[Guest]: a new discovery of the world and other people, right? But I think if you lock yourself into
[Guest]: that role of parenting, then this kind of a stunting happens of both parents and children.
[Guest]: So I think that childhood then doesn't become the place from which you grew up as it ought
[Guest]: to be. And I do see that replicated in a lot of young people's lives, a lot of young people
[Guest]: that I encounter, that there is also a desire to please the parents over much. There is
[Guest]: a desire to excel very fast in a way that is not possible when you're very young. You
[Guest]: need that time to become good at something, to learn. The importance of being unimportant,
[Guest]: in other words, has really been devalued, right? Because to not matter all that much
[Guest]: gives you the freedom to make mistakes and meander. But to all the time be in somebody's
[Guest]: gaze is suffocating. And I feel that is really the loss that some childhoods are experiencing.
[Amit Varma]: That's a very profound thought. And it also brings me to the question like both what you
[Amit Varma]: said about children suddenly having parents much more involved in growing up and also
[Amit Varma]: in the whole notion of the love affair with yourself, like you said, which I imagine for
[Amit Varma]: everyone would be a love-hate relationship. Brings me to the question of the construction
[Amit Varma]: of the self. Like if I may quote from one of your pieces, you've written an excellent
[Amit Varma]: article and all the pieces I refer to will be linked from the show notes. Quote, being
[Amit Varma]: yourself is often sold to us as something ineffable, as if there is a virgin self, noble
[Amit Varma]: and unadulterated found in the departmental store of life between Auroville mindfulness
[Amit Varma]: and vintage chic, which we must find and display for best results. Stop quote. And this really
[Amit Varma]: spoke to me because it's always struck me that you know what all these self help books
[Amit Varma]: talk about being true to yourself and finding yourself and being authentic and all of that
[Amit Varma]: is sort of circling around the central question of what are we it's not that all of us are
[Amit Varma]: unique. I mean, I tend to think that all of us are fundamentally the same. We are not
[Amit Varma]: blank slates because we are all hardwired in different but very similar ways. And obviously,
[Amit Varma]: we are brought up very differently and go through different influences. But rather than
[Amit Varma]: searching for an authentic self, I think it is more, perhaps, a wise to search for the
[Amit Varma]: best self that you can be after you define yourself. And this you know, when you from
[Amit Varma]: the point of view of growing up, for example, just thinking aloud, it seems to me that children
[Amit Varma]: at the time we grew up would have a lot more space to themselves to think about stuff and
[Amit Varma]: to find what interests them and where they want to do. Whereas now perhaps the anxieties
[Amit Varma]: that are ubiquitous in modern lives are onto them much earlier than they used to be. And
[Amit Varma]: they're anxious to please their parent, they're anxious to please their peers on social media,
[Amit Varma]: they're anxious to be validated and get notifications and retweets and so on. And dealing with anxiety
[Amit Varma]: is something that I think you will have to do anyway in an adult life. But now it comes
[Guest]: much earlier than it otherwise would.
[Guest]: It does. And I think like the fact that you're always supposed to be present for somebody
[Guest]: else's gaze, really, it's disturbing, you know, because it creates a distortion of yourself.
[Guest]: And I have to say that I don't think it's bad to be present for somebody else's gaze.
[Guest]: I think this seeing and being seen is not just a social kind of thing. It's also a profound
[Guest]: human exchange that when two people meet each other, they see something about each other.
[Guest]: That's what makes conversations really happen, right? I mean, the fact is that like why is
[Guest]: dating in India such an arduous thing? It's because people don't really have much by way
[Guest]: of the art of conversation going on for them, right? So there can be a dullness about or
[Guest]: a kind of by rote feeling about so many exchanges, because you're not really seeing the other
[Guest]: person and nor are you showing something of yourself. I mean, another version of this
[Guest]: is like sometimes women will say that I dress for myself. And they're saying it's reactively
[Guest]: because otherwise you're scrutinized so much for the way that you look as a woman. But
[Guest]: I think it's all right. It's all right to dress for yourself, but also to dress to please
[Guest]: others, also to dress to attract others. That is part of the exchange. Life is all about
[Guest]: yourself and others, yourself in the world, right? But I think that to be locked into
[Guest]: one thing where you can't withdraw from other people's gaze. Yes, I think that it's a terrifying
[Guest]: thought for me. So maybe I note it more when it's happening. But I think what I noticed
[Guest]: is that, you know, I began living on my own when I was 22 and it was very, very important
[Guest]: for me and not in a Virginia Woolf room of one's own kind of way, although it turned
[Guest]: out that that's a very important truth. But I mean, I just want I didn't want to share
[Guest]: a place with anybody. I lived very poor in tenement housing, but I knew I had to be on
[Guest]: my own. And of course, I got some of the snide stuff from my relatives, not my own family,
[Guest]: but my extended family about, well, obviously, if a girl wants to live on her own completely,
[Guest]: what is it for? It's because she wants to mess around with boys. And I did want to mess
[Guest]: around with boys, of course. But I also just wanted not to be scrutinized all the time.
[Guest]: I didn't want to account for every minute of my thoughts and movements. I just wanted
[Guest]: to come and go as I pleased. It was very hard being 22 or 23 and living on your own with
[Guest]: very little money. Even simple things like I didn't know how to cook properly and, you
[Guest]: know, I didn't have a fridge. There were a lot of logistical things you learn to navigate.
[Guest]: But it was the most important thing I ever did for myself because, yes, by being completely
[Guest]: on my own, I figured myself out. And it takes such a long time to do that. So if young people
[Guest]: don't have that space to even start that journey. And we live in a society that is so social
[Guest]: and so family oriented and people are so keen on marriage. When are you going to get that
[Guest]: time? Right. So I feel, yes, that we do need to worry about maybe not social media so much
[Guest]: because I think that if you have that sense of a relationship with yourself, it gives
[Guest]: you a resilience vis-a-vis social media as well. I don't think you become as dependent
[Guest]: on that validation if you are given the time and you learn to make it important to yourself.
[Amit Varma]: But how many people have that? And also what it strikes me and you've written about this
[Amit Varma]: very eloquently about, you know, how it's changed through the decades is just how one
[Amit Varma]: navigates relationships in the sense that like what you correctly said is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, one of my favorite writers, Georges Simenon, the French author, once said that
[Amit Varma]: the fundamental problem in all his work was how one person can communicate anything to
[Amit Varma]: another person. We are all in a sense strangers to each other, which at one sense is bizarre
[Amit Varma]: because we're all in a sense the same. But when you speak about the, you know, the problems
[Amit Varma]: of communication between men and women in modern India, which is especially acute outside
[Amit Varma]: elite circles, where there are so many anxieties, crippling anxieties and all of that. And it
[Amit Varma]: strikes me that it's so tragic. You have a boy and a girl sitting with each other and
[Amit Varma]: the boy is essentially dating a vision of the person he wants to be with and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't know the real person. And when the real people collide, it inevitably results
[Amit Varma]: in heartbreak and you can live in that kind of denial and delusion all your life.
[Guest]: You can. And I think so much of it also has to do with the fact that life is broken down
[Guest]: and that's not a new thing, but it's exacerbated now. Life is just like broken down into milestones
[Guest]: and goalposts, right? So you're just very anxious about getting to the next goalpost.
[Guest]: And that also in the dating scenario gets replicated, right? Like, am I going to get
[Guest]: to first place? Am I going to get to second place? Am I going to do this? Is this going
[Guest]: to be a real thing? Is this going to be no strings attached? What is it? Like constantly
[Guest]: worrying about what it is rather than figuring out what you're feeling at that moment, right?
[Guest]: So experiential things are not encouraged in our society. I remember that there was
[Guest]: a young woman who was part of a television show that I made and she had come away from
[Guest]: Meerut to be an actress in Bombay. And, you know, I mean, she didn't have much of a chance
[Guest]: of it. And then at some point she met Honey Singh at some awards function. I didn't even
[Guest]: know who Honey Singh was at the time we were making it. And in fact, I mean, one piece
[Guest]: of footage, she's dancing to something and I'm like, wow, this music is really awesome
[Guest]: that she's dancing to it. And my colleague was like, that's Honey Singh. And I'm like,
[Guest]: oh my God, isn't that the person that everybody hates? But you know, the fact that she loved
[Guest]: his music and she got to meet him. And that was kind of like the excitement of the Bombay
[Guest]: dream that you may not become the actress, but you can still meet your idol. So there
[Guest]: was a magical quality. And it was a show in which women shot their own lives on video
[Guest]: for about a year. So she, you know, I remember she met Honey Singh at the awards function
[Guest]: and then she goes with a friend on the bike, on bandstand. And she's so happy that this
[Guest]: has happened to her. And she calls her mom and she's like, Mom, do you know what? I met
[Guest]: Honey Singh today. And her mother says, what's the use of that? And her face collapses and
[Guest]: she says, I mean, I was feeling happy. But what's the point of it? How does it matter?
[Guest]: What's it going to add up to? It's something that we find a lot that we have to account
[Guest]: for. You repeatedly have stories of young people telling you that my parents don't care
[Guest]: that I found a job that I really, really enjoy. They just are like, oh, are you going to be
[Guest]: able to buy a house at x date? Are you able to do that? So now if that's what you're boiled
[Guest]: down to,
[Guest]: You could say she has an innocence by your definition, and they've lost it.
[Guest]: In fact, in fact, I remember that in one of the scenes, she was waiting for an audition
[Guest]: and she started talking to another boy who was at the audition. And she asked him, how
[Guest]: old are you? And he said, 21. And she said, innocent. I loved the way she said it so much.
[Guest]: So I also do frequently that were innocent. So but yes, she had that innocence, I have
[Guest]: to say, and maybe that's why what attracted me to as a character that she had the exuberance
[Guest]: to be happy, to allow life to surprise and delight her even in the shittiest of circumstances.
[Guest]: She was also willing to be in the shittiest of circumstances, because she imagined that
[Guest]: something good might happen.
[Amit Varma]: Which film was this and when was this?
[Guest]: It wasn't a film, it was a series that I did for Zee TV called Connected Hamtam. And it
[Guest]: was about five women at a turning point in their lives, real life women, who shot their
[Guest]: own lives with a video camera for one year. And then we made like these 65 thematic episodes
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: And when was this?
[Guest]: 2013, I think.
[Guest]: Oh, okay. Have you met her since?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I've been in touch with her. It's been a while. She's still the same. She's still
[Guest]: the same. And it's pretty remarkable, right? Because she still hasn't become an actress.
[Guest]: But she still thinks she might.
[Amit Varma]: The interesting thing about Honey Singh is though a lot of his music and lyrics are misogynist
[Amit Varma]: and he is whatever they say is a specific rape song that was attributed to him was actually
[Amit Varma]: fake news.
[Amit Varma]: It was by another band.
[Guest]: But he is misogynist. And I think like, the outrage against his lyrics, you know, I feel
[Guest]: divided about it. But I do think that, you know, if performers can be encouraged to think
[Guest]: outside the box, because these are also by rote formats, right, that you're gonna write
[Guest]: about a girl like this, and you're gonna do this, but you can actually write something
[Guest]: completely different, because a lot of it is also about the music and the kind of rhythmic
[Guest]: quality of the lyrics, right?
[Amit Varma]: But just thinking aloud, I guess, in an artistic sense, the more successful you are, the more
[Amit Varma]: you're incentivized to play it safe. Because if something has brought you there, boy meets
[Amit Varma]: girl songs have brought you there, why would you try something different, you know, and
[Amit Varma]: therefore, you only try to do different things where you're not successful. So whatever,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you
[Guest]: I mean, I think there's some truth in that. I think that only people who the people who
[Guest]: create newness and change are always the people who don't, who are not in the system already,
[Unknown]: right, who are not the beneficiaries. So that really brings us back to why dhariwala men
[Guest]: are so predictable and boring, why they'll always really imagine that the utterly boring
[Guest]: thing they've said is worth saying. It's because the system has rewarded them endlessly, right,
[Guest]: for just being guys. And so there's no challenge to that. Of course, the challenge has come
[Guest]: because you are seeing a complete change in gender relationship.
[Guest]: The challenges come from you. I mean, just dhariwala columnist versus non dhariwala columnist.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm presuming you include me among dhariwala columnists.
[Unknown]: I don't know about that.
[Unknown]: Yeah, now you're going to be polite.
[Amit Varma]: I refuse to come into all this.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, that's okay.
[Guest]: No, I'm just saying that, like, there is a shift, right? There are so many kinds of,
[Guest]: I mean, it's not just about women, like the entire trans community poses a complete rethink
[Guest]: to how we talk about gender and how we talk about each other for that matter. And I know
[Guest]: that sometimes political correctness feels like too much of a schlep. And it feels like,
[Guest]: oh, but you know, you're being too persnickety. But the thing is, it is the thing that brings
[Guest]: a shift in our way of looking at things, right? And whenever somebody tells me that, oh, it's
[Guest]: so difficult to use the pronoun they, like, what's the big deal? But you know, there was
[Guest]: a time when nobody, I remember that when I would say, please don't write miss, write
[Guest]: miss for me, people would be like, they'd roll their eyes. See, this is what I mean.
[Guest]: Boys love puns, but boys who will become men with beards. I used to always say I want a
[Guest]: t-shirt that says Pushpa, I hate puns because boys are often subjected to the unending puns
[Amit Varma]: and I'd be like, stop it, stop it. I don't often do this, but anyway, you've caught me
[Guest]: in a weak moment. If you say so. So I think that there is a challenge posed to that way
[Guest]: of being and thinking. And I think those people who embrace the challenge will do something
[Guest]: fantastic and new. And those who don't embrace the challenge, but who become sulky in the
[Guest]: face of the challenge or say that I'm being attacked and what do you people know? You
[Amit Varma]: will just keep doing the same old thing and become obsolete. So choose. Yeah, no. And
[Amit Varma]: what strikes me is that look, the universal anxiety that we all have and that humans have
[Amit Varma]: their hard wire to have is the anxiety to be loved, to be validated by others, right?
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you keep constructing yourself in response to what you think others would
[Amit Varma]: appreciate in you. You might define the others differently from people around you, but whatever
[Amit Varma]: you construct yourself that another thing is when society is changing so fast. And when
[Amit Varma]: the preferences of society are changing so fast, that also means that that constant reconstruction
[Amit Varma]: of the self also then has to gather us, you know, then the requirement for that gathers
[Amit Varma]: a certain velocity. And I can totally see a lot of people, including men with beards,
[Amit Varma]: including, you know, middle aged people like me, who are just then the reflexive responses
[Amit Varma]: to say, no more, you know, you know, what is this shit?
[Guest]: I mean, I think change is overwhelming, you know, change inside you and change outside
[Guest]: you is overwhelming. But maybe it also means making a different relationship to time. And
[Guest]: I would stress again, a different relationship to yourself. I think I have a friend who feels
[Guest]: annoyed by the way that I seem to keep shifting subjects I work on, because I do get interested
[Guest]: in a topic for a very long time, right? Like, I worked on a lot of things about the city
[Guest]: for an extremely long time. But just when writing about Bombay and making films about
[Guest]: Bombay became a cool thing, it felt like I shifted focus.
[Amit Varma]: You made a film trying to find Sandra from Bandra. Everybody watch it, please link from
[Guest]: the show notes. Yeah, so I'm thinking you're a rabbit hole person. I'm a rabbit hole person.
[Guest]: As in you find a subject you like and you go down the rabbit hole. Yeah, but I go down
[Guest]: the rabbit hole is the correct way, actually, because it's not like I'm not a completist.
[Guest]: I won't read all the books by writer and because I'm not a boy, I'll not get all the albums.
[Guest]: But I'm definitely willing to go down the rabbit hole and see what will happen. And
[Guest]: then once like the full pleasure of it has been experienced for me. And there must be
[Guest]: something perverse that when the really big rewards start coming in, because now that
[Guest]: thing has become more established as an idea and more people are working on it, I start
[Guest]: to lose interest in it. And I don't feel like doing it anymore. Now, this might just be
[Guest]: my personality quirk. But I think that saved me from some of the things that you're talking
[Guest]: about right now. So my friend who's annoyed with me, he calls me bunky Julia because he's
[Guest]: like the closer success comes to you, the more inside the forest you want to go and
[Guest]: like investigate some new Florida and fauna. And I'm like, Yeah, but imagine I get to do
[Guest]: it. So there are many ways to define success. One would be that I just sit in the same damn
[Guest]: tree until the turn of the tree comes around, right? Or the other is that I really like
[Guest]: I've worked for 30 years doing a number of very different things. I have not conformed
[Guest]: to this idea of the brand, right, that you just do one thing in one way, and then you
[Guest]: become really, really successful. And no, I'm not really successful in that sense. But
[Guest]: for me, the definition of success is that I want to do certain things. And I get to
[Amit Varma]: do them. And there's a memorable line from one of your columns that seems to express
[Amit Varma]: this where you talk about how the treadmill has been sold as a journey. Yes. And you've
[Amit Varma]: basically said that no, you know, I'm not getting on one of these treadmills. I'm going
[Guest]: deeper into the forest. And you know, it's because I have a great annoyance and dislike
[Guest]: of being bored. Like I cannot tolerate boredom of the kind that comes from pretense. So I
[Guest]: don't mean like sitting at a railway platform for three hours is unbearable. On days it
[Guest]: may be unbearable on days it's pretty okay to drift off. But that thing that you make
[Guest]: me watch a movie that is just pretentious. Yeah, it's like there's nothing new in it.
[Guest]: It's just pontificating. Or somebody writes the same old politically correct posturing
[Guest]: kind of novel that I'm supposed to hail it as the great new piece of political writing.
[Amit Varma]: I refuse. In fact, you've created a hashtag that sort of sums all this up. Why don't you
[Guest]: share it with us? Yes, I want to make this hashtag famous. Hashtag bore mat kar yaar.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Social media, please find ways to make this hashtag famous because it applies to
[Guest]: so much. Right. And I also think that if people refuse to be bored, the world will have a
[Guest]: lot more like lively work, you know, I think that actually, I feel the hashtag very political,
[Guest]: because I see so many people do a lot of boring work, but still get to be in really important
[Guest]: places, you know, like you'll see the same filmmakers in the same kind of film and everybody's
[Guest]: trashing the films, but they're again making those kinds of films. And the same opportunities
[Guest]: that are writers, there are columnists, there's all kinds of things. And it is privilege.
[Guest]: The very fact that you have gender and caste and class on your side means that you get
[Guest]: the right to bore other people. And I think you can boil it down to a very simple experience
[Guest]: that of going to a family dinner. And there's always one uncle who bores you, you know,
[Guest]: better let me tell you. And then they'll start telling you about, you know, whatever, whatever
[Guest]: is a new course, they don't even know anything about it, but they will start to tell you.
[Guest]: And I used to always get angry when this used to happen. I used to leave the table, I used
[Guest]: to say, abo kuch nahi pata, my parents would be like, you can't talk like that. And I'm
[Guest]: like, he can't talk like that. I know more about it than him. So this insubordination
[Guest]: wasn't coming out of rudeness or any kind of youthful hotheadedness. It is just like,
[Guest]: how can you bore me? Because that boringness is coming out of your right to oppress me.
[Guest]: You are taking up my time. You don't think that you have to charm me, please me, engage
[Guest]: with me. That is boredom, right? That you think I'm not there. I just have to be this
[Guest]: blank and captive audience to whatever you throw my way.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, that brings up an interesting question, which is that, does that mean that,
[Amit Varma]: for example, a filmmaker who wants a film to unwind at its own pace, like say, a Tarkovsky
[Amit Varma]: or a Bellator or whatever, is boring you and is not conscious enough of entertaining the
[Guest]: audience as you say?
[Guest]: No, I don't think that boredom is the opposite of entertainment in the conventional sense,
[Guest]: right? To engage me, to challenge me is to not bore me. Even when I said earlier that
[Guest]: the idea that you would show me the same hackneyed thing, the hackneyed thing pretending to be
[Guest]: new is a thing I can't bear. And we have too much of that around. Somebody is supposed
[Guest]: to be a cutting edge filmmaker who's not like that. That edge won't even cut butter. So
[Guest]: I just feel like I don't want to. I don't want to be part of receiving any of that.
[Guest]: I won't see those films. Like now, because I'm older, I also have a new column called
[Guest]: Life is Short, by column I don't mean writing column, but like it's a section in my invisible
[Guest]: notebook that I'm not seeing that film because life is short. I'm not going to do that because
[Guest]: life is short. But to engage us, to make us see the world differently, like a Tarkovsky,
[Guest]: classical music, Drupad, these are difficult things to learn and to enter sometimes, not
[Guest]: always. But I think the invitation to the entry is full of, there is a passion, there's
[Guest]: an intelligence, there's a challenge to me. I don't mind being challenged. I may even
[Guest]: come out saying that didn't really work for me, but I don't mind if there is that honesty
[Guest]: of that artist really wanting to do something, really having something to say. Right. So
[Guest]: I obviously don't mean that's something that is like, I met somebody the other day who
[Guest]: said like, you know, people don't have an attention span for more than six minutes now.
[Guest]: So the ideal length for a video is, or it should be 25 minutes, which every listener
[Guest]: of the scene in the unseen knows is utter bullshit. It is bullshit because you know,
[Guest]: I think films are as long as they need to be. And they could be very long and very short.
[Guest]: So I have made films 13 minutes long. I have made films 95 minutes long. I mean, I make
[Guest]: the film till the film is there. And I've had people watch the long films and the short
[Guest]: films. Somebody can feel bored in a 10 minute film also. I frequently felt bored in a 10
[Amit Varma]: minute film. You can feel bored in 30 seconds. Just to sort of pick up one of the phrases
[Amit Varma]: you use, which was hackneyed. And I'm again thinking aloud here. But you know, when I
[Amit Varma]: was a cricket writer, a decade and a half ago, and one of my constant bugbears was that
[Amit Varma]: Indian writers use so many effing cliches in their writing, you know, like Martin Amis
[Amit Varma]: titled one of his books, a war against cliche and cliches are obviously the biggest. And
[Amit Varma]: it happens far more in cricket. And after a while, I realized that no, wait a minute,
[Amit Varma]: it's not because they don't know. Or it's not because they can't think outside cliches.
[Amit Varma]: It's because especially in places like the Hindu where this post writing was supposed
[Amit Varma]: to be very good and was extremely bad and cliche ridden. And you know, verbose and flowery
[Amit Varma]: and cliche ridden. And, and I realized that it is a virtue to know as many cliches as
[Amit Varma]: you can, as for example, you know, Ravi Shastri does or Sidhu does, or whatever, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when I was blogging back on the blogspot version of India Uncut in perhaps circa 2005 2006,
[Amit Varma]: I started documenting Shastri's cliches well before anybody else. And it came to more than
[Amit Varma]: 100 posts, I think, because, you know, it would just think I don't know much about Shastri.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And, and I find this problem in films also, though, I am obviously not as educated
[Amit Varma]: in terms of films, as you are to be able to speak about it. But I find it one, the problem
[Amit Varma]: of avoiding cliches is harder in films. Because if you typically set up a scene in a particular
[Amit Varma]: way, it almost like becomes a convention ki pehle long shot fir mid shot, koi baat kar
[Amit Varma]: raha hai to close up, stuff like that. How do you avoid those cliches, which are perhaps
[Amit Varma]: harder to avoid, but all other kinds of cliches, like the way a story unfolds, or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, am I right in saying that the cliche is a bigger problem in Indian popular culture?
[Guest]: So I think that there is, I don't know if the cliche is a bigger problem. I don't I
[Guest]: mean, like, see, right now, there are the protests going on, and people are writing
[Guest]: poems at like a high, high rate. slogans are amazing. Yeah. And you're seeing so much newness.
[Guest]: You're seeing a real absence of cliches. Otherwise, you know, protests when you were younger,
[Guest]: like we used to cringe because they were a they were a location of cliches. And so much
[Guest]: of political language has been ridden by political cliche. But I would like to argue that one
[Guest]: can look at this occurrence of what you're calling cliche in two different ways. One
[Guest]: is that certainly in India, or Indian culture, Indian social culture, there seems to be a
[Guest]: great comfort derived from saying something which everybody knows. And there's a deep suspicion
[Guest]: of the person who is saying something that seems not so familiar. But more so if that
[Guest]: person is trying to say that I'm better than you, because I'm saying something not so familiar,
[Guest]: right? So yes, the joke, which we all know, will always make a group of people crack up.
[Guest]: And we always feel like, I mean, there'll be those of us who feel like this is a cliche
[Guest]: joke where people laughing at it. But there is something about like a kind of community
[Guest]: culture, where saying things which everybody knows, makes me seems to make urban middle
[Guest]: class people feel comfortable. So there's one type of cliche operating there. The other
[Guest]: is writing artistic production, where you do not expect to find cliche, you know, which
[Guest]: is supposed to be the place where cliches are killed. So the new things can be made
[Guest]: are so comfortably cliched, which I think does have a lot to do with privilege. Because
[Guest]: really, if a lot of your work and I'll take documentary film as an example, I think that
[Guest]: so much of Indian documentary filmmaking, there have been some great filmmakers here.
[Guest]: And I don't even want to preface the word doc filmmaking with documentary filmmaking
[Guest]: as if it's not a film, I feel very irritated with those who say, I'm going to make a film.
[Guest]: And they always mean fiction feature. But really, a documentary is also a film.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, this is why in my introduction, I specifically made sure I referred to you
[Guest]: as a filmmaker, not as a documentary film.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I mean, the thing is, I make documentaries and documentaries are a kind of film. But
[Guest]: I think that while there's been like tremendously exciting work done in Indian documentary,
[Guest]: you also have had a convention of the political documentary, which says the same things in
[Guest]: the same way forever and ever. And it is more a demonstration of your political position
[Guest]: than a real exploration of an idea from your political perspective. These are two different
[Guest]: things, right? So I feel like the first, which is just demonstrating your political position,
[Guest]: is simply a reiteration of your privilege.
[Amit Varma]: Can you illustrate that? I mean, not with specific people or so on, but you know.
[Guest]: So, you know, for example, I would say that there'll be a roster of topics of importance.
[Guest]: And communalism has always been on top of the list. If you want to show that you're
[Guest]: communal, you have to be anti-communal. So, for example, speaking about feminism, it's
[Guest]: not that high on the list. It's not considered to be that important. So similarly, having
[Guest]: a film which will not have a commentary is considered to be a purer kind of filmmaking
[Guest]: because you're letting the people speak in their own voices. These are certain cliches
[Guest]: of filmmaking. They're not cliches when they started out. They came from a very particular
[Guest]: place that the technology of cinema made it possible for us to record interviews. And
[Guest]: why should I impose what something means onto you? But after some time, it just becomes
[Guest]: a stock fashion of shooting something. You know, I'm not even really thinking about this.
[Guest]: I will make a film in which people will speak in their own voices. They will only fit into
[Guest]: a schema of what is liberal and not liberal. But by making that film, what is really happening,
[Guest]: I am showing that I am liberal. And because I am liberal, I should have the privilege
[Guest]: to decide things for others. And my way of saying should rule the country. So a lot of
[Guest]: the enterprise of documentary film was too closely entangled with the idea of the nation
[Guest]: state and how the nation state should be. So either it's critiquing the nation state
[Guest]: or it is with films division expressing the desires of the nation state. In contrast to
[Guest]: that, what you do have in the late 90s and early 2000s is a kind of like an efflorescence
[Guest]: of filmmaking approaches where somebody is making a film about their parents. Somebody
[Guest]: is making a film about body image. I made a film about feminism and what it means to
[Guest]: me. So you're actually seeing suddenly that documentary becomes a way to express yourself
[Guest]: creatively and politically. And that gets rid of some of the cliches. So what I want
[Guest]: to say actually is that a cliche in form or cliche in work is really a cliched way of
[Guest]: thinking. It presents something that is otherwise considered to be a cliche suddenly seems fresh
[Guest]: when it is located in a different way of thinking. And I would say we should also be careful
[Guest]: to distinguish between cliches and conventions. I don't think that conventions are automatically
[Guest]: bad things. I think the convention becomes a cliche when the filmmaker is not really
[Guest]: thinking or the artist is not really thinking why they want something in their film, right?
[Guest]: So I'll give you an example in film criticism. One of the things that you frequently find
[Guest]: people saying in India is, oh, you know, it's Indian films are inferior because they have
[Guest]: song and dance. People are running around trees. This idea that realism makes a film
[Guest]: more rational, that it makes it superior and serious. And therefore, it's an art film and
[Guest]: that's what we should aspire to. I think this is such a primitive way to think about something.
[Guest]: You know, realism is only an aesthetic because everything is a lie. Everything that we make
[Guest]: is a construction. So realism is a kind of way in which I make the film. And fantasy
[Amit Varma]: is another way in which I might make the film.
[Amit Varma]: You're never realistic. You're just pretending to be realistic is what you're saying. And
[Guest]: therefore, it has as much artifice only expressed differently.
[Guest]: So realism is an artifice, the same way that when you say, oh, today is Desi day. So today
[Guest]: you wear a saree. As if to say you are not Desi on the rest of the days, but you are
[Guest]: Desi and your dress is as Desi as a saree in some senses. Is English and Indian languages
[Guest]: one of those same discussions, right? So what is considered to be the norm and what is considered
[Guest]: to be the oddity or the exception then has a lot to do with who is in a place of privilege
[Guest]: or what ideas are being privileged, right? So the idea that we now have to shake off
[Guest]: this Desi-ness, it's like having some kind of an accent in your English that you have
[Guest]: songs in your film, right? That makes the film somehow infradig. I feel this is really
[Guest]: cliche thinking because in fact, the presence of the songs is an act of great sophistication
[Guest]: in filmmaking. It's the poetic with the prosaic, right? It's a place of emotion. It's a place
[Guest]: of eroticism. We've had great poets write songs in Hindi films. You have amazing song
[Guest]: picturizations. The height of sophistication of Hindi filmmaking is in the songs. The height
[Guest]: of stupidity is in the criticism that says, Oh my God, these songs. So, you know, a stupid
[Guest]: gaze can destroy something beautiful so quickly. And the stupid gaze often comes with just
[Guest]: privilege, which doesn't recognize that there are other ways of looking at the world. And
[Guest]: that's why that gaze is always destined to become obsolete. The person who retains their
[Guest]: innocence in a way, which is to say that I could be wrong. I could change the way I think.
[Guest]: There is no danger in changing the way I think because I'm not clinging to my privilege at
[Guest]: all costs. That person is not going to become obsolete because they will always be open
[Guest]: to the new thing, feel delighted by it, and then employ it in their work, right? So I
[Guest]: think that's the kind of cliche tendency which creates boringness. So we now will have very
[Guest]: boring films or very retrograde films in their thought, which look realistic. So now everybody
[Guest]: will say it's very good. And, you know, it's these are the people who will put India in
[Guest]: the international scene. Why do we care so much about the international scene? Like who's
[Guest]: gaze that's performing for somebody else's gaze? I mean, we've got a massive country
[Guest]: with massive audiences. I think we're pretty okay. So, you know, that's why I love Shahrukh
[Guest]: Khan because Shahrukh Khan is like, no, I care about the Indian audience.
[Amit Varma]: And this is fascinating because I was talking about cliches and cricket writing in popular
[Amit Varma]: culture. And you sort of expanded my gaze on cliches, by pointing out that cliches can
[Amit Varma]: apply to ideology and politics as well. And what it boils down to is that, you know, another
[Amit Varma]: way of thinking about this is that look, the world is deeply complicated. So we have to
[Amit Varma]: explain it to ourselves by making up stories about it, by building frames through which
[Amit Varma]: we can look at the world and things make sense. And we build those frames. And those frames
[Amit Varma]: give us a certain comfort and therefore become a cliched way of thinking. And especially
[Amit Varma]: in modern, we start to assume they are normal. Yeah, yeah, right. And that seems to be especially
[Amit Varma]: hardened in modern times by two things. One is, of course, social media has the effect
[Amit Varma]: of drawing us into echo chambers and what Cass Sunstein calls group polarization, where
[Amit Varma]: within groups who agree with us, we become increasingly more extreme than we already
[Amit Varma]: were and more hardened. And the other also is that, you know, I feel incredibly thankful
[Amit Varma]: that 25 years ago, there was no Twitter, because I would have said and done the stupidest things.
[Amit Varma]: And then, because I have put something out in public, I would have felt compelled out
[Amit Varma]: of ego to double down on it. And that could actually have become my hardened position,
[Amit Varma]: almost forced by the gaze of others that once I have said this, and then people attack me,
[Amit Varma]: and then I double down on it. And then I find a tribe that agrees with the original thing
[Amit Varma]: I said, and soon I am part of the tribe and any independent thinking I could subsequently
[Amit Varma]: have done, sort of vanishes. And that's, that's something that worries me.
[Guest]: Do you think that really you never had hardened positions before Twitter, in your peer group?
[Amit Varma]: Of course I did. But I think they arose gradually. And I also think that the early positions
[Amit Varma]: I had when I was in college, might have hardened, I'm speculating, might have hardened, had
[Amit Varma]: I actually taken positions on them in social media, and joined a particular ideological
[Amit Varma]: tribe or the other, and then I would never have been able to leave.
[Guest]: Maybe I don't know. But I think that, you know, already the previous discussion we were
[Guest]: having tells us that maybe social media amplifies what is already out there. But I do think
[Guest]: that there are so many people who choose something very early in life, and then stick to it,
[Guest]: no matter what, even if they're miserable, stay in bad marriages, in awful jobs, because
[Guest]: I think that's what they ought to do. They've said that this is what they are, and now they
[Amit Varma]: cannot possibly abandon it.
[Amit Varma]: That's a sunk cost fallacy plus the inertia of life.
[Guest]: Inertia of fear, what else is out there, plus great dependence on how other people see you.
[Guest]: So I think like this hardening of positions, first of all, I think in youth, we all do
[Guest]: it to some extent or the other. So for example, a common example of it is when two people
[Guest]: you know who are romantically involved fall out with each other, right? And say you've
[Guest]: never liked your friend's boyfriend. And then she's like, he's this way and he's that way.
[Guest]: You're like, yeah, I always felt he's this way. I'm so relieved you're not seeing him.
[Guest]: After one week, they get back together. It's over, right? Like you're out of the picture.
[Guest]: Because to some extent, so I think it's the fact that people feel like they want to disconnect
[Guest]: themselves from that position which they had. That's one way. So they harden the position
[Guest]: for the boyfriend. No, I never said that. You were the one who was saying this, whatever,
[Guest]: that would be one. The other thing is that once they have said he's horrible, they're
[Guest]: unable to go back to the person because they have said he's horrible, right? So this tendency
[Guest]: to harden the position, I think it's a human tendency. I do think that, yeah, because social
[Guest]: media is so amplified and social media rewards you fast. You have reason to stick with very
[Guest]: silly type of things. But I don't think it's any different than real life. The fact that
[Guest]: you won't leave a marriage, relationship, job, career choice, house, family that's cruel
[Guest]: to you, whatever, all of these things. I mean, when you see the show The Crown, you often
[Guest]: wonder why Princess Margaret doesn't just give everyone a kick and go off. But she's
[Guest]: just embedded in that royal family, its privileges, and wanting their approval despite the immense
[Guest]: cruelty to her. So I feel like actually that happens. And social media has created different
[Guest]: types of cultural capital and rewarding very quickly. So it's very difficult for you to
[Guest]: leave those rewards, but it is exactly the same as life. And in other words, I have also
[Guest]: seen people on social media change their positions over time. I have seen them become different.
[Guest]: I have been trolled a couple of times very badly online quite some time ago before it
[Guest]: was such a common thing. And because it was not so common, it was traumatic for me. And
[Guest]: the first time around, I cried. I felt like I'll never recover from it. It felt very,
[Guest]: very serious. But I think the impact that it had on me actually was, A, I thought very
[Guest]: hard about why it had happened. I felt there was even, I didn't agree with it, but I didn't
[Guest]: disagree with the essential political thought that it emerged from. And actually, because
[Guest]: I suffered so much from its cruelty, it did change a little bit the way I began to write
[Guest]: about other people. So I feel in the long run, it did change me, and it did change my
[Guest]: positions. Since I'm not a person who takes a lot of, like, I don't spend a lot of my
[Guest]: time online, I don't express myself online in the same way. Perhaps I'm not the right
[Guest]: person to talk about it. But I do feel that this interactivity with others can yield many
[Guest]: selves. And I have seen other people also change the way that they are. I don't think
[Guest]: it's impossible. But and I do think that through this very, you know, like, hyperkinetic format
[Guest]: that we're in, we will also reach a place of conversation, which is more reasonable,
[Amit Varma]: I hope.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I don't want to be an old man with beard railing against social media. And oh,
[Guest]: look what the young...
[Guest]: No, you love social media.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I love social media. And one of the things that I think it gives us is an escape
[Amit Varma]: from cliche. Because we are exposed to newer kinds of thinking than we otherwise would
[Amit Varma]: have been newer forms of art than we otherwise would have been. And that sort of changes
[Amit Varma]: everything. So I kind of came into this episode thinking, okay, there are three big themes,
[Amit Varma]: I guess we'll talk about, which are feminism, documentary filmmaking, and desire and sexuality.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, we've had this delightfully digressive chat, which we will continue, which I'm very
[Amit Varma]: happy. This is exactly I think my listeners will agree, this is exactly how a good conversation
[Amit Varma]: should be. And we shall continue after the break and also get to those three topics.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you've gotten so far in this podcast, it means you like listening to good audio content
[Amit Varma]: and you're thirsty for knowledge. In that case, I'd urge you to check out Storytel,
[Amit Varma]: the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform that has a massive range
[Amit Varma]: of audiobooks from around the world. Their international collection is stellar, but so
[Amit Varma]: is their local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and Hindi audiobooks. What's
[Amit Varma]: more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit Verma, in which I talk
[Amit Varma]: about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of the book and so on.
[Amit Varma]: As long as Storytel sponsors the show, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on that
[Amit Varma]: platform every week. My recommendation for this week is a brilliant collection of short
[Amit Varma]: stories by Hansda Sauvendra Shekhar called The Adivasi Will Not Dance. When I first read
[Amit Varma]: this book, it reminded me of Manto. And you can now listen to The Adivasi Will Not Dance
[Amit Varma]: by Hansda Sauvendra Shekhar on Storytel. Download their app or visit Storytel.com. Remember
[Amit Varma]: that Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com. Welcome back to the Scene and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Paromita Vohra on many, many different non-cliched things. And let's
[Amit Varma]: kind of get back to biography. So you know, one of the interesting things I learned about
[Amit Varma]: you while trying to research for the show was that you once worked in the same place
[Amit Varma]: as I did, which is Channel V. And you wrote Videocon flashback for Javed Jafri for a short
[Amit Varma]: time for a short time. And I wrote Timex Timepass for him a little while after that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both of us also worked with Manu Chopra, who was the lead writer on both those shows. Take
[Amit Varma]: me through your journey working while living alone in Mumbai. Like, were you sure from
[Amit Varma]: the start that you want to be a filmmaker? What did you want to be? How was that process
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: I think, I mean, like people often ask me, when did you decide this? I decided early.
[Guest]: But it was not decided. I mean, I don't know. I was not a very career minded person. I was
[Guest]: very like I wanted to work, but I didn't know what I wanted to do. And I studied English
[Guest]: literature in college. I went to a great college with great teachers, Miranda House. And I
[Guest]: kind of felt like I'll just do my MA now. And I didn't have any plan in life. I had
[Guest]: a teacher, Zakia Pathak. She was really awesome. Very strict, very rigorous intellectually.
[Guest]: And she used to wear fantastic earrings. So we were all very dazzled by her. And she taught
[Guest]: us the Greek classics. And I was quite a chela of hers and would feel devastated if I disappointed
[Guest]: her in any way. In my third, and you know, I had no friends. I was just like misfit character.
[Guest]: I didn't even take the U special because I was so scared of other people. The U special
[Guest]: is a bus in Delhi, which is only for the university, the university special. It's a DTC bus, but
[Guest]: it only goes to the university from different areas. But I didn't go in it. In fact, I suffered
[Guest]: the bad DTC buses because I was more scared of my peers than of the molesters in the buses.
[Guest]: Why were you scared of your peers?
[Guest]: Because I perceived myself to be very odd. I thought people would mock me or make fun
[Guest]: of me or something. Like I really felt very uncomfortable with other people. And I felt
[Guest]: my differentness very acutely, in part maybe because I had changed schools such a lot.
[Guest]: And being the new kid always, you're already very strange and different and bookish. And
[Guest]: then you're also the new kid. And I was very shy. I am very shy, although it doesn't seem
[Guest]: that way. So I think I found it very difficult. I found it very, very difficult to be a young
[Guest]: person. And I wasn't like other young people with that life and those pursuits that young
[Guest]: people have. So it's only later in college that I began to make some friends. So I had
[Guest]: friends in school, not that I didn't, but I didn't have that kind of youth lifestyle
[Guest]: that many of my peers did. My cousins, my sister, all of them. So anyway, in the end
[Guest]: of my first year, I came second in the university. But I know there have been the doldrums academically
[Guest]: for quite a long time. So suddenly, I mean, I made the college famous. So I suddenly became
[Guest]: famous. And that gave me a certain amount of confidence, which is why I also have this
[Guest]: belief that, you know, people always telling you that you must learn to love yourself and
[Guest]: only then the world will love you. But I don't think so. I think sometimes when the world
[Guest]: loves you, you also learn to love yourself. And certainly when people began to take me
[Guest]: seriously because I had got some kind of academic rank, I also took myself a bit seriously.
[Guest]: I felt a bit more confident as I started making some friends. And then I made a lot of friends
[Guest]: and I became extremely sociable. And by the time I hit the third year, I was like, anyway,
[Guest]: I didn't like the third year syllabus so much. And I began doing a little badly, relatively.
[Guest]: And one day Sakya Pathak met me in the corridor and she said, Paramita, what do you plan to
[Guest]: do after college? She had this very clipped way of talking. I don't know, ma'am, I think
[Guest]: I'll do my MA. I also said it in this very like, I'm so stylish, I don't know what I'm
[Guest]: going to do. And she said, this is an extremely non-serious approach. It's very nice to be
[Guest]: popular, but that doesn't mean that your studies should suffer. So I said, no, ma'am, I don't
[Guest]: know. I immediately became siddha. And I said, no, I think I'm going to do my MA. She said,
[Guest]: we would love to have somebody like you in academics, but it's very important to go out
[Guest]: into the real world and see what else there is. And if you don't like it, you can always
[Guest]: come back. I'm so happy she said that to me because I kind of took it to heart. And then
[Guest]: my friends were doing this, they're going to apply for this Mastcom thing. And by then
[Guest]: I knew, like people used to let me be a journalist. I didn't want to be a journalist. I knew I
[Guest]: wanted to do something creative and documentary films sort of like made its appearance on
[Guest]: my horizon. And I thought like, maybe this. And then I came to Bombay to study at the
[Guest]: Sophia College at the Polytech doing Mastcom. And the first Bombay Documentary Festival happened
[Guest]: when I was in college. And we got that week off to watch films. So every day from nine
[Guest]: in the morning to nine at night, I watched films nonstop. And I think it was fantastic
[Guest]: because I saw that documentaries are very open ended form. You can make anything, everything
[Guest]: is a documentary, right? And it was also because there were not only Indian films, but films
[Guest]: from all time in India. So I saw filmmakers like Shastri, Sukhdev, etc, who've seen a
[Guest]: resurgence and rediscovery in the last few years, but whom we didn't know in the 90s.
[Guest]: And I also saw great filmmakers from around the world. It was like an amazing edition
[Amit Varma]: of the festival.
[Amit Varma]: What are the people who struck you or what are the films which struck you in particular
[Guest]: and inspired you?
[Guest]: Well, I think I remember that I saw India 67 by Sukhdev and felt amazed that this was
[Guest]: a film I could make. You know, Anand Patwardhan came to show us Bombay, our city and it totally
[Guest]: like galvanized me as a young person, I felt full of political fervor. But of course, later,
[Guest]: Jean Rouge, Chronicle of a Summer is my favorite film, favorite film, I adore that film. And
[Guest]: it was, it's just my desire to make a film like that someday. And Agnes Varda, whom I
[Guest]: love very much. So these, you know, Chris Marker, I think these are all filmmakers.
[Guest]: And as you can see many, like Chris Marker is a very abstract filmmaker. So to go back
[Guest]: to our earlier conversation, although I believe that things should be engaging and pleasurable,
[Guest]: I do think pleasure is also intellectual. I think thinking is the greatest pleasure
[Guest]: in the world. It's the most luxurious and voluptuous thing that we can have is to just
[Guest]: think. So all of these filmmakers actually think in different ways, and they have created
[Guest]: different forms for the way they think. So I love that. And I felt this is a form in
[Guest]: which I can be political, creative, expressive, and I can be myself. I can find myself. I'm
[Guest]: saying this retrospectively. I don't think I had this thought at that age. But I felt
[Guest]: ki haan. I mean, if you look at it biographically, perhaps the story of my life is the story
[Guest]: of hiding from my peers at all times. No, no one else from your Mastcom class went came
[Guest]: to this documentary. No, actually, I'm trying to think is anybody else? No. I was the only
[Guest]: person who who makes documentary films from my badge, if I remember right. Some people
[Guest]: might have applied for the internships, like, you know, whatever, I got to do my internship
[Guest]: with Anand Patwardhan, which was also very lucky for me, because it was right at the
[Guest]: heart of what I wanted to do. And I worked for Anand for three and a half years, which
[Guest]: was, I would say, a great political education. Imagine you're a middle class kid, and you
[Guest]: end up working for a political filmmaker. There I discovered textile mill workers union,
[Guest]: I discovered organizations like Awaz-e-Niswa, Ekta Samiti. I mean, there was just a whole
[Guest]: world of independent artists and political people, actors, filmmakers, all sorts of people
[Guest]: coming in and out of Anand's house. He did all his work on his own, right, like all he
[Guest]: owned his own equipment and edited his own films. So for a young person, it was a great
[Guest]: exposure to filmmaking as well. I was also lucky because it was at one of the most fertile
[Guest]: periods of Anand's life. And I think it didn't hurt that he had a very obsessively hardworking
[Guest]: assistant like me, to augment that a bit, but he made three films while I worked with
[Guest]: him. So I also got a lot of learning from it. And you know, I have my differences with
[Guest]: his kind of filmmaking, and we've argued about that. But I think it opened up, it opened
[Guest]: up a world for me. It helped me to add, even the fact that I had differences, right? The
[Guest]: fact that I sat for three years and watched him edit, allowed me to think that I don't
[Guest]: think he should do this. I don't think we should talk about this in this way. And that's
[Guest]: a big thing, to be able to work with an artist for a long time, to see how their voice is,
[Guest]: to not only be thinking of what kind of film you want to make, just to be immersed. It
[Guest]: is such an amazing experience and a very great learning, which I think young people really
[Guest]: deprive themselves of nowadays, because everybody's very keen to make something of their own fast.
[Guest]: But I think just being a bit lucca, and being an assistant for a long period of time was
[Guest]: good for me. When I quit my job there, I worked with a couple of other filmmakers, Richard
[Guest]: Joshi. But then also, I was living in Bombay, and I had to earn a living, right? So I ended
[Guest]: up doing like, I directed a couple of episodes on one show you might remember called Show
[Guest]: Theme. Do you remember?
[Amit Varma]: No, I don't remember which one.
[Guest]: Oh God, it used to be on Doordarshan. And it was one of those early, in the 80s, a show
[Guest]: where there would be a theme. And there would be an anchor talking about that theme. And
[Guest]: then there'll be scenes from films or songs from films around that theme. And I directed
[Guest]: an episode where Bhagyashree Patwardhan was the anchor. So I was quite excited. So yeah,
[Guest]: I worked with Manju Singh. I don't know if you would remember her, Manju Didi. She used
[Amit Varma]: to do one children's show on TV.
[Guest]: The name is familiar. I think I'm a few years after you in the last few years.
[Guest]: Four or five years.
[Guest]: Yeah, the late 80s is like, I don't...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So but you've seen Golmal, the Rishikesh Mukherjee.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: So the person who plays Amol Palekar's sister, she was like this famous Manju Didi of Doordarshan,
[Guest]: right? And so I worked with her, which was, yeah, she was already, not many people knew
[Guest]: her anymore. But she also had produced this great series called Ek Kahani.
[Unknown]: I remember.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah. So, you know, I mean, it was already at the end of her glory days, but still, it
[Guest]: was an interesting thing to go into all these different universes. Then Channel V happened
[Guest]: and I worked there for a while. I wrote a soap opera, which had never got made. I did
[Guest]: a bunch of different things. And I'm very grateful for that chance. I worked on Sanjay
[Guest]: Leela Bhansali's film Khamushi. I wrote some of the scenes in that film.
[Amit Varma]: Horrendous.
[Amit Varma]: I just said horrendous in response to Bhansali. I'm sure your scenes were very good.
[Guest]: I mean, actually, I'm a great fan of Bhansali's.
[Amit Varma]: Khamushi is actually a pretty good film, but I'm not a fan of his later work. I have to
[Guest]: confess.
[Guest]: Oh, well, I loved Hamdil Dei Chukya Sanam and I love Ram Leela. But yes, I got a lot
[Guest]: of gullies for writing a column in which I praised Ram Leela from my friends because
[Guest]: they went and saw it and they were like, Paro, what do you mean?
[Guest]: You are trolling us now.
[Guest]: I feel like Bombay afforded all these possibilities. Two things, really. One is that you could
[Guest]: go into completely different universes. It's not just that you're stuck with your own kind
[Guest]: of people. It's not like you moved to Bombay and stayed in the Bandra-Varsova stretch and
[Guest]: hung out with other hipsters and tried to make it in a fairly sanitized media industry.
[Guest]: But really here, to make a living, you did what you could do. On the one hand, what would
[Guest]: now be called hipster space of Channel V. There was a very political space of political
[Guest]: documentary. There was a slightly like seedy space of the B-grade television and sometimes
[Guest]: writing some faalto script for somebody, whatever. Corporate films. I worked for a corporate
[Guest]: filmmaker for a while, but it was so good. I worked on a couple of ad films. So to have
[Guest]: this very agnostic kind of Catholic exposure, to learn that I really don't want to do this,
[Guest]: oh, I see what is needed to do this. I think it was really good for me. I think it somehow
[Guest]: was formative in a way I didn't understand at that time. And I think it was lucky for
[Guest]: me because it mirrored my personality without my realizing it, because I am very eclectic
[Guest]: in my tastes, in my work, and in the worlds I like to belong to. So this kind of a queer
[Amit Varma]: existence, you could say.
[Amit Varma]: Did it also shape your personality as much as mirror it?
[Guest]: Who can say? I think certainly the fact that you go into different places allows you to
[Guest]: see things from different points of view. When you're working on a film, your job is
[Guest]: to do whatever is needed to be done for that film. So in a sense, you sign on to the enterprise
[Guest]: and you see it from the point of view of that enterprise, whatever is needed to be seen.
[Guest]: You may disagree with it. You may say, ye mujhe jamta nahi hai, ye film ko aise nahi
[Guest]: banana chahiye, whatever, and leave. But you have been through that whole journey. So I
[Guest]: think this is valuable. Yes, maybe it does shape your personality in that you learn to
[Guest]: be more relaxed about yourself because you also become more confident about what you
[Guest]: think. Whereas if you always exist only in one universe, you may lose some of that confidence
[Guest]: in yourself because you become very dependent on the dynamics of that universe.
[Amit Varma]: No, and what I see in a lot of young people today, like you mentioned earlier, that they
[Amit Varma]: want to make their thing very fast. And there is a sense of entitlement that the world sort
[Amit Varma]: of owes them something. And your experience seems interesting, not just in terms of the
[Amit Varma]: fact that you had a long apprenticeship in various places, or that, you know, the eclectic
[Amit Varma]: nature of your learning. But also, would you say that part of growing as an artist, one
[Amit Varma]: quality that is important to be able to grow as an artist is also humility, where you're
[Amit Varma]: willing to learn from others and from different sort of setups, even if, you know, you're
[Amit Varma]: not looking down and saying, oh, this is B grade, I don't want to do this. But it's like,
[Amit Varma]: no, what can I learn from this? Is that a big part? Because it seems to me that one
[Amit Varma]: of the follies of youth, and you know, certainly one of the things I lacked when I was younger
[Amit Varma]: and I've only gradually come to appreciate, is that humility where you are not the center
[Amit Varma]: of the universe.
[Guest]: I think not being the center of the universe is very well put. It's very important. I come
[Guest]: from a mixed family. My father was Punjabi and my mom is half Bengali and half Khoja.
[Guest]: And when my mother experienced the full and pleasurable force of Punjabiyat, I would say,
[Guest]: because I love being Punjabi. She always used to say that, you know, something would happen
[Guest]: and she'd say, oh, PMS, which was not pre-menstrual syndrome, Punjabi male syndrome.
[Amit Varma]: Twitter kindly note, this can be another hashtag.
[Guest]: But it would be about how much boys are valued, actually, that mothers love their sons more
[Guest]: than they love their daughters. But the way in which we value boys and don't value girls
[Guest]: is that boys don't really know what it is not to be the center of the universe.
[Guest]: And in a sense, what we discussed earlier about young people or children, the fact that
[Guest]: children are always at the center of their parents' universe. So that becomes a crisis
[Guest]: when you're not at the center of the universe. You feel anxious and you feel you're failing
[Guest]: if you're not all the time at the center of the universe, which is a lot of what accrues
[Guest]: through social media validation, right? That, OK, I'm at the center. I'm at the center
[Guest]: of the conversation. So I think, yes, not being at the center of things was very important
[Guest]: for me. Maybe it suited my personality, which is that I'm scared of everybody and wants
[Guest]: to hide, but it also did shape my perspective. In fact, it allowed me to come to the center
[Guest]: from time to time without feeling I have to be there all the time, right?
[Guest]: And this idea of a dance, I like the metaphor of the dance in so many ways because it is
[Guest]: about somebody leads, somebody follows. You can take turns doing that, or there can be
[Guest]: a group of people. You can be a backup dancer for some time, and then you can be the central
[Guest]: dancer for some time. And sometimes when you work on a friend's film, it is that, right?
[Guest]: I've had friends who are filmmakers work on my films. I have worked on my friend's film
[Guest]: in any sort of capacity sometimes. Recently, I directed a video and I had very bad assistant
[Guest]: directors on it, and I knew that I was going to get screwed if I didn't get better help.
[Guest]: And I called up my friend, and three of my women friends were all directors who've all
[Guest]: made feature films and are accomplished directors. They came and they assisted me like they were
[Guest]: writing things on cupcakes and they were just doing everything. And this other friend of
[Guest]: mine who'd come to the set was like, wow, these women are amazing. And look at the way
[Guest]: they've just taken over and they know what to do. And I'm like, obviously they're filmmakers,
[Guest]: but they didn't have any hang ups about coming and just doing that. And I think I feel the
[Guest]: same way, right? So I think what that gave me, it's not only about it's okay not to be
[Guest]: at the center, it gave me tremendous enjoyment of life, right? Like it is so enjoyable not
[Guest]: to be the one who's responsible. When you are working on somebody else's film, you're
[Guest]: having all the fun of being on a project without a really big responsibility of...
[Amit Varma]: You share in the pleasure of the work without the pressure so much.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's like being an aunt, right? Like you get the fun of the kids without...
[Amit Varma]: Without having to change the diapers.
[Guest]: But you're also there as a support to your friends. And you experience that. What does
[Guest]: it mean to be part of a group in a positive sense while being an individual? Actually,
[Guest]: you get to experience that. That's one thing. I think the other thing that it taught me,
[Guest]: which is very important, you know, is to get out of that clich thinking. No thing is
[Guest]: automatically better or worse. You look at everything for itself. One of my favorite
[Guest]: lines is a line from a Hindi film song, a very old Hindi film song. And it is,
[Guest]: Badli teri nazar to nazare badal gaye. If you look at something differently, it looks
[Amit Varma]: different, right? It's what gaze you bring to it.
[Amit Varma]: I think your film Unlimited Girls has this quote from, quote about changing your eyes
[Guest]: instead of...
[Guest]: Now a very famous masterposed. The journey of discovery lies not in seeking new landscapes,
[Amit Varma]: but in finding new eyes.
[Guest]: Yeah, which really struck me.
[Guest]: No, it is a beautiful thought. It's an important thought. Love is that kind of a thing, right?
[Guest]: That when you look at something with the gaze of love, you see it very differently than
[Guest]: when you look at it with a cold gaze. So very bad behavior, looked at compassionately and
[Guest]: with love, becomes explained that somebody is hurting, so they are behaving badly. And
[Guest]: you understand that. As opposed to when you're not looking at them with love and you're just
[Guest]: like, what the hell is this behavior? And both gazes are important and valid in their
[Guest]: own ways. So I think I learned the value of that.
[Guest]: It also opened me up in a very interesting way. So for example, while making my films,
[Guest]: I found this peculiar experience that often people whose politics I agreed with would
[Guest]: behave obnoxiously. And people whose politics I was opposed to would behave very nicely
[Guest]: with me, right? Like you're interviewing some fundamentalist, moral policing type of
[Guest]: person, and they're calling you to their house and taking out their best china and
[Guest]: giving you sarson ka saag and makki ki roti. And there's somebody whose politics you
[Guest]: admire and they keep you waiting, they cancel at the last minute. And to be open to
[Guest]: understanding this, that you know, you can agree and disagree with people at multiple
[Guest]: levels. I can disagree with your behavior, while agreeing with your ideas, and vice
[Guest]: versa. Actually, it also changed my political perspective. So I feel like traversing all
[Guest]: of these different universes allowed me to be politically much more open.
[Amit Varma]: No, and this is something like what you just spoke about speaks to this fundamental
[Amit Varma]: truth of what Walt Whitman expressed in, you know, I contain multitudes. And the thing
[Amit Varma]: is, in today's day and age, where everything is, oh, there I go on my man with beard social
[Guest]: media rant again, but it made you so self conscious. You made me so self conscious.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent. Actually shaved today before coming. So but not that that takes away my beard.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, so you know, we often want to see the world in binaries. And we refuse to
[Amit Varma]: accept that people can have so many multiple sides to them. But there is this almost this
[Amit Varma]: need to condemn anyone as a hero or a villain. And anyone who tries to find nuances
[Amit Varma]: is basically shat upon by all sides. You know, for example, when Vajpayee died, and it was
[Amit Varma]: all a binary. And the truth of the matter is that he enabled fascism to a certain extent.
[Amit Varma]: At the same time, he was an excellent Prime Minister. And there's no harm in sort of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, accepting both those sides. And even within those sides, the different sort
[Amit Varma]: of journeys that he made. And it's, you know, the same with Nehru, for example, you know,
[Amit Varma]: again, a great man, I can say a lot that is good about him, and a lot that is bad about
[Amit Varma]: him. But today, it's like you only see a Nehru which is a caricature, not a real, fully rounded
[Guest]: person.
[Amit Varma]: Just a person who was trying to do something, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And you never consider the circumstances of the times or what those people are sort of
[Amit Varma]: responding to or reacting to or whatever.
[Guest]: No, I think that what you say thinking in binaries is the great affliction of our times,
[Guest]: you know, and the internet.
[Guest]: Spoken like a man with beard, honestly.
[Guest]: Once in a while, we take your privilege for ourselves, just as a little bow, not the whole
[Guest]: costume. But I think that, you know, eventually, we can't remain in that binary, you know,
[Guest]: human beings can't. And we will always shake ourselves free from it. And then the binary
[Guest]: tries to impose itself on us and we shake ourselves free from it. So I do think that
[Guest]: things like poetry, art, feminism, all of these things, they exist to demolish that
[Guest]: binary and the queerness of being politically, humanly, sexually, emotionally. That's life.
[Guest]: That's actually where life happens, you know. The truth lies in the middle, as they say
[Guest]: sometimes. But I think that's not a fashionable viewpoint right now. I think that why it's
[Guest]: particularly difficult is because if you're not willing to see things like step out of
[Guest]: them for a second and see them as processes that are occurring, people play a certain
[Guest]: part in history and certain really good intentions can have really bad effects at times. We see
[Guest]: this in individual life and we see this in historical moments. And if we're not able
[Guest]: to do that for ourselves, we will always feel very afflicted. And I think we'll find it
[Guest]: difficult to, we'll be anxious all the time, like our anxieties will, it'll ratchet up
[Guest]: our anxieties. And we do see that as well, right? So I guess we will find a way as human
[Guest]: beings to move away from these binaries. I do think that a lot of the protests that we
[Guest]: see around us right now in this political moment is actually a push back against this
[Guest]: very, very constricting way in which both liberal and right-wing politics have often
[Guest]: constructed reality and politics for us. You are seeing now people redefining that politics.
[Guest]: And I think we can't look at these protests, for instance, only in terms of the immediate
[Guest]: result, but in a long-term sense, they signal a shift in the way people are thinking about
[Guest]: who they are, how they should be, how politics should happen, who should make that politics
[Guest]: happen. What we call leaderless revolutions is not an easy thing, but it is there. It's
[Guest]: a real thing that's happening, right? There are multiple leaders, multiple voices. So
[Guest]: I think it indicates that we want to get out of the binary and we're looking for a way
[Guest]: to do it. That's why a lot of it is happening offline. It's not coming from the online,
[Amit Varma]: which has become rigid as a structure.
[Amit Varma]: That's very true. And a reflection of that is perhaps these spontaneous protests that
[Amit Varma]: are happening throughout the country over the last few days. And they're not led by
[Amit Varma]: anyone or even any particular ideological core or whatever. They're just spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: outbursts and within them, they contain so much diversity. And yet they're all responding
[Guest]: to the times in this passionate way.
[Guest]: And perhaps it was important for some time to assert our differences. Maybe that was
[Guest]: needed to not say hum sab ek hai, because hum sab ek nahi hai. To assert that differentness,
[Guest]: to talk about caste, gender, sexuality, class, language, ethnic identities, all of these
[Guest]: things, maybe we needed to do that in order to come to a place of some commonality, right?
[Guest]: So I do see it also as that kind of a cyclical movement.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Let's kind of get back to the first of our themes I wanted to pursue, which is
[Unknown]: no, don't give that embarrassed look. I'm thoroughly enjoying this. This is my model
[Amit Varma]: conversation. I sadly booked the studio only for three hours. So we have an hour and a
[Amit Varma]: half only to go. Let's talk about sort of documentary filmmaking. And one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you've spoken about is how there were these traditional notions of what documentaries
[Amit Varma]: are and your journey through discovering documentaries and making them yourself changed
[Amit Varma]: those notions completely. Can you elaborate a bit on that?
[Guest]: So I think the kind of documentary film orthodoxies that I inherited were very much about
[Guest]: the political activist documentary, which, you know, chose an issue, followed that issue,
[Guest]: interviewed people to get their perspective, critiqued the kind of structures of privilege
[Guest]: that were creating those inequalities. There was, as I said earlier, a roster of important
[Guest]: topics. So you talked about communism, labor, caste, very much lower down the line gender.
[Guest]: Sexuality was nowhere on the scene for sure in the films. You also had what I call the
[Guest]: pan-Indian documentary, right? Documentaries that were made often represented themselves
[Guest]: as being about India. And these issues were supposed to represent the concerns of all
[Guest]: of India. I think when I started making films as an assistant, this was the orthodoxy, but
[Guest]: there were other... See, there was also a partial history of documentary that you received
[Guest]: since this was the overwhelming way in which a documentary was considered important.
[Guest]: Like, how did a documentary attain significance if it had all of these qualities?
[Guest]: Then it would be circulated among certain spaces because it's not like it was going
[Guest]: to the market and then people were liking it or not liking it.
[Guest]: There was a completely different logic by which documentary circulated.
[Guest]: So it conformed very much to fulfilling these notions of what is a good documentary.
[Guest]: However, that said, there were a few filmmakers, both who existed before.
[Guest]: Like, for example, films division was considered a government film.
[Guest]: But as we now know, there were, of course, great filmmakers working in FD in the 60s
[Guest]: and their films are now, like when we watch them, I feel very modern, very exciting,
[Guest]: critical of the government. All of that is also going on, right?
[Guest]: But we never really got to know about those films when we were young people,
[Guest]: insofar as anybody got to know anything about documentary.
[Guest]: Even working in documentary, the people and the filmmakers you got to know about
[Guest]: were all of them who were involved in the political documentary.
[Guest]: But a few filmmakers were on the scene.
[Guest]: Reena Mohan made this exquisite film called Kamla Bai about the first woman
[Guest]: to be on the Indian screen, Kamla Bai Gokhale.
[Guest]: It's a very unusual film because it's only Kamla Bai talking for 40 minutes
[Guest]: and she is indescribable.
[Guest]: She's very profane and full of character and sharpness. She's 88 or something in the film.
[Guest]: She's very old in the film, but it's incredible.
[Guest]: And I had never seen a film like that.
[Guest]: And it's very important to see Indian films which are different, right?
[Guest]: Like, it's not enough to see films from other countries.
[Guest]: You need to see something which is of your context.
[Guest]: There was Madhushri Dutta.
[Guest]: There were, I would say, a number of women filmmakers who were emerging on the scene
[Guest]: who were making films quite differently, who were looking at the idea of biography as history,
[Guest]: for instance, which is another way of saying the personal is political.
[Guest]: So, there was a beautiful film called Sagira Begum by Sameera Jain,
[Guest]: which was made in the 90s.
[Guest]: So, a little bit of this was beginning to happen.
[Guest]: By the time that I started, when I started to make films, you know, technology was also changing.
[Guest]: So, video was coming in.
[Guest]: So, you have to understand that when first films were made on celluloid,
[Guest]: before liberalization, you had to get permission to even buy a roll of film.
[Guest]: You had to apply for a permit.
[Guest]: So, it was expensive and it was difficult.
[Guest]: But then with video coming in, a certain kind of democratization of access starts to happen,
[Guest]: but it was still expensive.
[Guest]: So, I made my first couple of films on a format called Betacam.
[Guest]: And then digital video came in.
[Guest]: And it coincided, I think, with the fact that we'd had 10 years after liberalization.
[Guest]: So, many of the traditional audiences of documentary film had actually scattered, right?
[Guest]: People's movements.
[Guest]: All of that had, to some extent, been decimated.
[Guest]: Trade unions and even women's organizations, to an extent.
[Guest]: NGOs had come in.
[Guest]: A lot of shift had happened on the political landscape.
[Guest]: So, I think there was a need to build up a new political audience or a new audience.
[Guest]: And I think that my generation of filmmakers, if one were to think that there were people
[Guest]: who entered documentaries from a purely political perspective,
[Guest]: a generation after that that entered documentaries from a kind of...
[Guest]: They studied filmmaking and they were also looking at it filmically.
[Guest]: And then I think you have a generation like mine, which is coming at it from a very creative
[Guest]: and personal and political, everything, perspective.
[Guest]: And I'm going to say that I'm generalizing.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not that everybody has a creative impulse.
[Guest]: But because it coincided with the coming of digital technology,
[Guest]: it enabled a lot of experimentation.
[Guest]: And I think when I made Unlimited Girls in 2002, I was also able to fully express
[Guest]: something that I was feeling filmically, like to bring into it every format almost
[Guest]: that I had poked my nose into in the last 10 years of working and living in Bombay.
[Guest]: But I also, I think I wanted to politically express what I was seeing in the world around me.
[Guest]: I didn't want to replicate the political orthodoxies that I was being given.
[Guest]: And I think that was a significant shift that you are making a film with an observational politics.
[Guest]: Your politics is not pre-decided.
[Guest]: There is no schema.
[Guest]: You have a question in your heart.
[Guest]: What was my question in Unlimited Girls?
[Guest]: If you're a feminist, can you still have love?
[Guest]: What makes feminists, what makes people say, I believe in equality,
[Guest]: but I don't know if I want to call myself a feminist.
[Guest]: It's the fear of losing love.
[Guest]: It's the fear of losing belonging.
[Guest]: And this was a thought that I, as a 30-year-old who had lived a feminist life for 10 years,
[Guest]: was thinking about.
[Guest]: And I didn't think that the answer that you get from many movements that, you know,
[Guest]: you'll always have the sisterhood, was really an answer that worked.
[Guest]: So that question drove the making of that film.
[Guest]: That film was full of all the things that I love, from yellow nail polish,
[Guest]: to internet chat rooms, to making these fake ads.
[Guest]: Like, it was full of my desires, my pleasures, what I had seen in the world,
[Guest]: what I found amazing.
[Guest]: And it was also full of my own personal political experiences,
[Guest]: which was of living on my own, decorating my own house,
[Guest]: feeling the excitement of being a grown-up person in a city
[Guest]: where you have your own power, allowed to give you your own power.
[Guest]: It's not the power that is delivered to your parents' house or your aunt's house,
[Guest]: your own newspaper bill.
[Guest]: You know, even these things, your own house key,
[Guest]: they're such crucial, exciting bits of being a grown-up.
[Guest]: And all of that is in the film, actually.
[Guest]: Having my own camera.
[Guest]: And also, actually, this thing that I call feminism and think about partially,
[Guest]: what is it actually?
[Guest]: To go on a journey of discovering it.
[Guest]: And I think it paralleled both my own personal needs and desires,
[Guest]: as well as something that perhaps other young people felt
[Guest]: in a language that was very much of the time.
[Guest]: You know, John Waters, a filmmaker whom I love,
[Guest]: has this thing that he says artists are never ahead of their times.
[Guest]: Artists are off their times.
[Guest]: People are behind the times.
[Guest]: But in a way, I think, yes, some films come along which are off their time.
[Guest]: They're so deeply off their time that they will always remain contemporary
[Guest]: for that reason, because they were contemporary in the moment.
[Guest]: So they're not created in order to mirror their times.
[Amit Varma]: They are their times.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I mean, you made Unlimited Girls in 2002,
[Amit Varma]: and I'm ashamed to confess, as I did to you,
[Amit Varma]: I only watched it recently while after I invited you.
[Amit Varma]: You're in a big, shameful group of people. Don't worry.
[Amit Varma]: I'm in a big, shameful group of people.
[Amit Varma]: But again, what you said really strikes me as true,
[Amit Varma]: because it is not of 2002, although it has a lot of delightful,
[Amit Varma]: artifact-y things like a computer booting up and a Yahoo chat room.
[Amit Varma]: But it is really of this time.
[Amit Varma]: And I was particularly struck, one, by how in such an entertaining
[Amit Varma]: and empathetic way you documented what was essentially
[Amit Varma]: your intellectual journey of discovering what feminism was,
[Amit Varma]: which I thought was sort of that central quest,
[Amit Varma]: and two, also how it was constructed.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, one of the things that you have sometimes spoken about
[Amit Varma]: is the artificial distinction between fiction and documentary
[Amit Varma]: and the power of the camera.
[Amit Varma]: And it also strikes me that, and again, this is something common
[Amit Varma]: to documentaries and social media, that wherever you are,
[Amit Varma]: in either of these, you are supposed to be real.
[Amit Varma]: You're pretending it's a real you, but it's performative.
[Amit Varma]: You're performing for the world.
[Amit Varma]: So as a documentary filmmaker, also you're absorbing what is a performing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in some sense, of course, as we chat with each other,
[Amit Varma]: we are performing for each other in the audience.
[Amit Varma]: And what is interesting, what I found really lovely about Unlimited Girls
[Amit Varma]: is a lot of it is fiction, you know, like the chats that you portray
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and some of it is, but it's so crisply put together.
[Guest]: It is such good storytelling.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: I mean, I think, you know, I also, filmmaking is a collective enterprise,
[Guest]: and I mean my editor, Jabeen, my cameraman, Mrinal Desai,
[Guest]: or everybody who was part of the film and so many people.
[Guest]: I feel that the greatest artifact of Unlimited Girls is the credits.
[Guest]: The credits are very long, and if you read the credits,
[Guest]: you'll see the names of many people who went on to be independent filmmakers.
[Guest]: So really, I think there was a big scene that was also part of the making
[Guest]: of Unlimited Girls that helped me to make the film that I made.
[Guest]: I was part of that scene, and that's an amazing thing to have.
[Guest]: But I think that there was a way, like there was an idea, right?
[Guest]: Like there was primarily a creative idea of how the film would be told,
[Guest]: and it came from a political idea.
[Guest]: I will not make a film which is a debate between patriarchy and feminism,
[Guest]: which is going to be a zero-sum game.
[Guest]: I'm not interested in that.
[Guest]: I want to talk about feminism for all the fantastic things it is,
[Guest]: like what feminism has made possible for me and made possible in the world.
[Guest]: So this is a film about feminism, which will not waste its time talking about patriarchy,
[Guest]: in part because it's a waste of time to talk about patriarchy.
[Guest]: Like why will I pay so much attention to something I don't like
[Guest]: when I could spend so much time talking about something I love?
[Guest]: And two, I do believe that many films have been made already
[Guest]: before I made Unlimited Girls, which critiqued patriarchy.
[Guest]: So there is no need for me to reinvent that wheel.
[Guest]: I'm going to assume that people understand that.
[Guest]: So I'm not going to think that my audience needs to be indoctrinated.
[Guest]: I am not making the film to indoctrinate my audience,
[Guest]: but to have a conversation with my audience.
[Guest]: So I want to make a film about two people who are a little bit separated on the spectrum,
[Guest]: Chunky Girl and Fearless, who are both feminist-ish, as I call it.
[Guest]: But Fearless is like, yeah, I mean, I guess I am one, but I don't know.
[Guest]: It's a label, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So let me figure it out.
[Guest]: And at the end of the film, Fearless is like, yes, it's a compliment to be called a feminist.
[Amit Varma]: So she makes that journey from ambivalence to ownership.
[Amit Varma]: You of course voice Fearless in the film, but did that also mirror your own development?
[Guest]: No, I never had any ambivalence about being a feminist.
[Guest]: Like the first time somebody said that, oh, don't listen to her, she's a feminist,
[Guest]: before I really knew what the word meant, I was like, sounds good.
[Guest]: Whatever. Yeah, feminist.
[Guest]: Because if the thing you're saying, don't listen to her, is a problem for you,
[Guest]: and I love that thing, I'm cool. Call me what you want.
[Guest]: So I've always owned that word.
[Guest]: And I have really, my life has been illuminated and animated by the idea of feminism, among other ideas.
[Guest]: But I think that this idea that there'll be a conversation,
[Guest]: and also when I began researching the film, I found so many well-kept cyclostyle notes,
[Guest]: because cyclostyling is another artifact for another time,
[Guest]: which were of all these conferences and all these meetings that had happened,
[Guest]: and so many disagreements, right? So many disagreements.
[Guest]: At one of the feminist conferences, there was a whole discussion on whether lesbianism can be a feminist issue.
[Guest]: And it was decided that it's not.
[Guest]: And there was a sense of deep betrayal, because there were so many lesbian women
[Guest]: who were also in the feminist movement.
[Guest]: But you saw the same people coming back to another conference two years later,
[Guest]: you were seeing a shift.
[Guest]: So actually it was kind of fantastic to read all those notes and see,
[Guest]: these people keep arguing with each other, but they keep coming back to the table,
[Guest]: and they keep changing.
[Guest]: And when you look at the history of the movement, one of the reasons
[Guest]: that it has remained as a movement in a very strong sense,
[Guest]: is it has always tried to learn from its mistakes.
[Guest]: It may not always have done so successfully, but Shah Bano, Bhavri Devi,
[Guest]: these have been landmark moments in the history of the Indian women's movement,
[Guest]: which have shown a mirror to privilege and forced women to reassess
[Guest]: what it means to be a feminist in India, right?
[Guest]: So I think this is a great quality, this conversational quality of the movement.
[Guest]: And I wanted to replicate this conversation without having
[Guest]: what a famous filmmaker, Deepa Dhanraj calls,
[Guest]: well, her cameraman, rather Navro's contractor calls,
[Guest]: women sitting in a circle talking,
[Guest]: which was a kind of motif of many feminist films.
[Guest]: And I was like, how do I get these women in a circle talking?
[Guest]: Take them out of the circle, put them in a chat room.
[Guest]: Yes, put them in a chat room. That is exactly what I did.
[Guest]: I put them in a chat room.
[Guest]: And the chat room itself is a mixture of fiction and nonfiction,
[Guest]: because some of the voices are real women's voices.
[Guest]: Some are actors. Some are lines that people actually said.
[Guest]: Some are lines that I wrote to make the conversation more seamless.
[Guest]: So, you know, the film does feel crisp and seamless,
[Guest]: because it is constructed in the way a fiction film would be constructed,
[Guest]: but using reality materials.
[Guest]: And I also don't believe, as you know, I've already said ad nauseum in this discussion,
[Guest]: that realism is just a costume, like any other costume.
[Guest]: And I think that the whole idea of the documentary
[Guest]: is very intertwined with the idea of the nation state.
[Guest]: And the fact that it has been removed from the market has been very bad for documentary.
[Guest]: Because had it been part of the market just like every other film,
[Guest]: it would be meaningful and it would keep changing in different ways.
[Guest]: I think what is very significant about Unlimited Girls is
[Guest]: it was a film very deeply in relationship to an audience.
[Guest]: And all my films have been very much in relationship to an audience.
[Guest]: So it's not like I have a position which is very pure and now I'm going to tell it to you.
[Guest]: But it's like, I want to dance with you.
[Guest]: Come, let's dance. I'm leading the dance.
[Guest]: But let's dance.
[Guest]: You're free to misinterpret the film in a different way and disagree with it.
[Guest]: I keep the film structures very open in ways that I don't mind if people disagree.
[Guest]: There's enough places for you to disagree and agree.
[Guest]: So that is also how the film is constructed.
[Guest]: There is not a unitary.
[Guest]: My position, I think, is very clear.
[Guest]: You can make up in the films what I actually think.
[Guest]: But I feel happy that I found a structure of work
[Guest]: which allows for other points of view to be kind of framed.
[Guest]: And I think this was significant about Unlimited Girls.
[Guest]: And in the years since I've had many, many young filmmakers tell me
[Guest]: I never was interested in documentary till I saw Unlimited Girls.
[Guest]: And I thought, oh, it's possible to do it this way.
[Guest]: So I think it's also important that something gets made so that
[Guest]: the way that I saw other people's films and felt like, OK, I can do this.
[Guest]: So you keep increasing that possibility.
[Guest]: The other thing which you're really doing when you're doing that is that
[Guest]: since you're refusing to replicate the positions and the formats that came before you,
[Guest]: you are actually also foregoing that privilege.
[Guest]: You are unmaking privilege.
[Guest]: And I can't stress how important I think this is.
[Guest]: The thing is, I don't want to be disingenuous
[Guest]: and say that by making films in the way that I did,
[Guest]: I lost privilege and also I didn't get to be in the A-list festivals
[Guest]: and I'm always in some peculiar position.
[Guest]: But of course, she matters.
[Amit Varma]: But exactly how does she matter kind of is a question in people's minds.
[Amit Varma]: And you also pointed out about how you never got any awards.
[Amit Varma]: And someone who was on many of these award panels once told you that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, I love your films more than all these other people,
[Amit Varma]: but you are too entertaining.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you're too enjoyable.
[Amit Varma]: You're too enjoyable.
[Guest]: It's not entertaining, it was you're too enjoyable.
[Guest]: And I thought, how sad for you that you doubt your own enjoyment so much.
[Guest]: What happened to you that you don't believe that the thing you like
[Guest]: is worth embracing in public?
[Guest]: And that is a story of most people's lives.
[Guest]: The thing that they love, they do not have the confidence to own.
[Amit Varma]: You could call Shakespeare enjoyable.
[Guest]: Shakespeare is enjoyable.
[Guest]: He is and in his time he was a commercial guy, Dickens.
[Guest]: Much Ado About Nothing is one of my favorite plays
[Guest]: because it's just been enjoyable, right?
[Guest]: So I think that this idea of enjoyment,
[Guest]: it's a deep discomfort with the body, the body's pleasures,
[Amit Varma]: simple human pleasures.
[Amit Varma]: That art must take effort.
[Amit Varma]: And if I'm consuming it effortlessly and laughing,
[Guest]: then maybe it's not art.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the thing that thinking can be pleasurable,
[Guest]: like all of this is woven into our miracles.
[Guest]: But the thing is, what you said earlier, the power of the camera.
[Guest]: I was interviewed for a film and I started crying.
[Guest]: And I was shocked because I thought, like, I'm a filmmaker.
[Guest]: I know what's going on.
[Guest]: And I don't want to be seen crying on camera, right?
[Guest]: So I think that it made me very conscious
[Guest]: that the camera has a power dynamic beyond and above everything.
[Amit Varma]: This is under the skin or something.
[Guest]: Skin deep.
[Guest]: Skin deep, yeah, sorry.
[Guest]: But I think that what it helps me to do is think hard
[Guest]: about how can I tackle this problem of privilege.
[Guest]: And one of the ways in which I did it is, you know,
[Guest]: creating this persona of fearless or the persona of goddess Annapurna.
[Guest]: There are all these very strange characters
[Guest]: who are telling the tale of the film, whom you can't fully trust.
[Guest]: So it's a way of telling you that you don't need to trust a filmmaker.
[Guest]: I form no intimate relationships with my subjects.
[Guest]: In fact, I don't have, I mean, I have what I call an intellectual intimacy
[Guest]: in the format of interview that I do, which is a bit like what we're doing.
[Guest]: Like, it'll be a lengthy interview, but it won't be very intensely personal.
[Guest]: Like, don't spill your guts.
[Guest]: I don't make friends with people.
[Guest]: I don't lie to them about my political position, even if we're opposed,
[Guest]: because I want to do the maximum possible for you
[Guest]: to not tell me anything you don't want to tell me.
[Guest]: And I might still try to get it out of you,
[Guest]: but you should have some agency to deny me, right?
[Guest]: Now, I don't believe that I'm always able to achieve this perfectly,
[Guest]: but it's my desire.
[Guest]: And I think as a filmmaker, I do have that much ego,
[Guest]: that even if you don't give me everything that would make it an easy interview to cut,
[Guest]: I can still do something to make this good, right?
[Guest]: So I think Unlimited Girls was all of those things.
[Guest]: And in the films that followed, I guess I explored this path in different ways.
[Guest]: And, you know, the different films obviously had different kinds of results,
[Amit Varma]: but these were the central questions.
[Amit Varma]: No, and in fact, Unlimited Girls will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So please do watch the film there.
[Amit Varma]: I want to talk a lot more about feminism,
[Amit Varma]: but I have a couple of questions about filmmaking that I'll sort of get out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: One is an ethical question and the other is an aesthetic question,
[Amit Varma]: but also with an ethical component.
[Amit Varma]: And the ethical question is that, you know, you have once said, quote,
[Amit Varma]: the central dilemma of documentary is that you're taking someone else's story
[Amit Varma]: and making something with that, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also a question asked to, for example,
[Amit Varma]: many narrative nonfiction writers or long form journalists,
[Amit Varma]: that you go into someone's life and you spend time with them
[Amit Varma]: and you take their trust and you take their stories.
[Amit Varma]: And then you just go away and it's for your own self-interest.
[Amit Varma]: You build something that will benefit you and not them.
[Guest]: This is clearly something you've grappled with.
[Guest]: Yes. And I think that my discomfort with that, you know,
[Guest]: that I take somebody's story and on what pretext that is going to,
[Guest]: it's politically important.
[Guest]: That's what people always told, right?
[Guest]: It's very important to tell your story because it will make a difference.
[Guest]: But will it make a difference to that person's life?
[Guest]: Oftentimes not. Right.
[Guest]: And I think it's only by confronting that,
[Guest]: that I arrived at a different form of filmmaking,
[Guest]: which did not require people to expose themselves on camera,
[Guest]: but only to say what they think about something.
[Guest]: So, in fact, you know, even I made a film called Q2P,
[Guest]: which is about public toilets.
[Guest]: Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.
[Guest]: There was no Swachh Bharat Abhiyan then.
[Amit Varma]: There was a Shat Pratishas Chauchala Abhiyan.
[Amit Varma]: It was called that in those days.
[Amit Varma]: Which later movie renamed, of course.
[Guest]: So, I think even in that film,
[Guest]: a lot of it is like, what do you think about this?
[Guest]: What do you feel about this? Right?
[Guest]: So, actually, it's that kind of an intellectual conversation.
[Guest]: And even so, some lines get crossed,
[Guest]: like, I shot this woman bathing her little baby.
[Guest]: And that's always an uncomfortable sequence, right?
[Guest]: Because she's on the road, so I filmed it.
[Guest]: Would I go into your house and film you bathing your baby?
[Guest]: I couldn't without your permission.
[Guest]: And sometimes you try to build in something
[Guest]: which is self-reflexive into the film.
[Guest]: But I feel that's also a little bit of a disingenuous thing.
[Guest]: But that said, you know, this power dynamic will remain.
[Guest]: It will remain in research.
[Guest]: It will remain in any time that we engage with each other.
[Guest]: You may edit some things out of this interview.
[Guest]: I'm trying to retain agency.
[Guest]: You're trying to give me some.
[Guest]: But yet, we have some desires of our own.
[Amit Varma]: And I think this is part of human life.
[Guest]: I never actually edit anything from interviews.
[Guest]: You're so ethical.
[Guest]: But since I edit a lot.
[Guest]: But I think there is a way in which we are always trying
[Guest]: to get something from each other, right?
[Guest]: All relationships are about that.
[Guest]: So the question is, what's the max ethical place
[Guest]: we can bring our relationship to?
[Guest]: What's the max ethical place a filmmaker
[Guest]: or a person working with nonfiction
[Guest]: can bring their work to?
[Guest]: I think different artists address and solve
[Guest]: this question differently.
[Guest]: I think I solve mine by introducing huge elements
[Guest]: of fiction so that the onus is not on the nonfiction story.
[Guest]: I don't make films which are character-driven.
[Guest]: I'm very uncomfortable with a single-character film.
[Guest]: Not all.
[Guest]: There are some great ones.
[Guest]: But mostly, I also don't make films about topics
[Guest]: which are like other people's suffering,
[Guest]: mind for importance.
[Guest]: I don't know if it's right or wrong.
[Guest]: But this has been my way of addressing it.
[Guest]: So I guess I have ended up making what you'd call
[Guest]: an essay film, which really thinks about a concept
[Guest]: or an idea rather than takes one particular reality
[Guest]: and then tries to make a story out of that reality
[Amit Varma]: which will stand in for a larger idea.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it did strike me about Unlimited Girls
[Amit Varma]: while I was watching that.
[Amit Varma]: There is no one in that film who would feel
[Amit Varma]: exploited by your having shown them in that way.
[Amit Varma]: And I sort of go by Kant's categorical imperative
[Amit Varma]: of never using another person as a means
[Amit Varma]: instead of an end.
[Amit Varma]: And the means versus end informs a lot of my
[Amit Varma]: value judgments, which is why, for example,
[Amit Varma]: I'm completely opposed to string operations
[Amit Varma]: because whatever the higher cause is,
[Amit Varma]: it's based on deception.
[Amit Varma]: You're deceiving someone.
[Amit Varma]: But the way you are tackling that,
[Amit Varma]: if I got you correctly, is by being very straightforward
[Amit Varma]: with the subject on what it is exactly
[Amit Varma]: than what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: And then they have the agency to deal with that
[Amit Varma]: how they will.
[Guest]: And also that the larger structure of the film
[Guest]: doesn't depend on them.
[Guest]: Actually, the larger structure of the film
[Guest]: depends on my artistry, right?
[Guest]: So I make myself vulnerable.
[Guest]: And I feel like you have to put your ass on the line.
[Guest]: This hiding behind the subject
[Guest]: in order to get political importance.
[Guest]: I am strictly opposed to it, and I hate it.
[Guest]: And I feel there's so much of what we call
[Guest]: virtue signaling, right, online.
[Guest]: So you see that online also,
[Guest]: but you saw that also in political work.
[Guest]: So I think, yeah, but at some level,
[Guest]: I also feel like, you know,
[Guest]: if you look at the history of art,
[Guest]: art has almost never used reality.
[Guest]: Until photography emerges,
[Guest]: you don't have realistic forms of that kind
[Guest]: because even when you make a botanical image,
[Guest]: we know it's an image.
[Guest]: The artistry is present.
[Guest]: So we never believe that it's the thing itself.
[Guest]: So this idea that I shot something,
[Guest]: and that thing is the truth,
[Guest]: so I am very good
[Guest]: because I showed you the truth.
[Guest]: That idea only emerges very late
[Guest]: in the history of art.
[Guest]: So if you look at Indian culture,
[Guest]: we don't have this realism funda at all, right?
[Guest]: Like, you look at all our forms,
[Guest]: and the closest you get
[Guest]: to something that engages with
[Guest]: factuality or reality around us,
[Guest]: actuality, as we call it,
[Guest]: is the imitator.
[Guest]: So the behrupia wears,
[Guest]: dons a persona,
[Guest]: and then,
[Guest]: it's not on a stage,
[Guest]: but it's within real life, right?
[Guest]: So I might don the persona of a milkman
[Guest]: and come to your house every day,
[Guest]: but you don't know I'm the behrupia,
[Guest]: who's pretending to be a milkman.
[Guest]: Or I might dress up as Lord Shiva
[Guest]: and roam around,
[Guest]: and am I Lord Shiva or am I the behrupia?
[Guest]: People respond to me differently, right?
[Guest]: So this notion compels me in a very interesting,
[Guest]: I find it very interesting,
[Guest]: that the closest we come to an actuality form
[Guest]: is one which actually mixes fiction
[Guest]: and non-fiction.
[Guest]: And it does so in order to comment on the world.
[Guest]: Because how you respond to the behrupia
[Guest]: says something about you,
[Guest]: as well as how well the behrupia has done their job.
[Guest]: And when you really look at the history
[Guest]: of behrupia practice,
[Guest]: you know, behrupias are not allowed to stay
[Guest]: in their mask,
[Guest]: I mean, in their persona,
[Guest]: for more than a certain number of days.
[Guest]: I forget the number of days now.
[Guest]: Because you should not become the mask.
[Guest]: And I mean, this is a very interesting question
[Guest]: when it comes to online anonymous accounts,
[Guest]: like Twitter accounts which are anonymous.
[Amit Varma]: There are behrupias which become the mask, perhaps?
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: And when you become the mask,
[Guest]: you become attached to the power of the mask.
[Guest]: That is why you must not stay in the persona
[Guest]: for too long.
[Guest]: Because otherwise you get attached
[Guest]: to the power of that anonymity.
[Guest]: And then it will lose its meaningfulness
[Guest]: to destabilize reality, right?
[Guest]: The jester, or the behrupia,
[Guest]: destabilizes reality.
[Guest]: But if you keep on and on being that,
[Guest]: you will become part of the power structure.
[Guest]: Because you have a power by being hidden.
[Guest]: So it should remain at the level
[Guest]: of vulnerability for both of you.
[Guest]: Which is exactly like love, right?
[Guest]: It should remain at the level
[Guest]: of vulnerability for both of you.
[Guest]: Otherwise it's oppression.
[Guest]: So I think that it's an interesting thing
[Guest]: to work with a form that uses fictional methods
[Guest]: and the fiction inside the non-fiction
[Guest]: to think about reality.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating insight.
[Amit Varma]: My next question, which I promise,
[Amit Varma]: which is really an esoteric question,
[Amit Varma]: is that I noticed in Unlimited Girls,
[Amit Varma]: for example, and it's probably selective noticing.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me if I'm overthinking it.
[Amit Varma]: But you had a lot of shots
[Amit Varma]: which were very unobtrusive
[Amit Varma]: in the sense you're shooting them
[Amit Varma]: from a low angle or from the side
[Amit Varma]: and you're not in their face.
[Amit Varma]: And is that a deliberate thing
[Amit Varma]: in terms of you don't want them
[Amit Varma]: to be conscious of the camera?
[Amit Varma]: So in a sense, you're hiding it
[Amit Varma]: out of their natural line of sight?
[Guest]: No, the camera was never hidden
[Guest]: because of the camera person.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's not hidden.
[Guest]: Just in the sense that it's not
[Guest]: immediately visible right there.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, I think...
[Amit Varma]: That you take the camera
[Amit Varma]: out of the action, so to say,
[Guest]: and it's just...
[Guest]: But I think it wasn't so much
[Guest]: in order to make them feel that way.
[Guest]: But there was this idea
[Guest]: that you would not see Fearless,
[Guest]: but Fearless would kind of stand in
[Guest]: for the camera.
[Guest]: It was like a virtualness
[Guest]: of you being in Fearless's body.
[Guest]: But also because I was really
[Guest]: experimenting in Unlimited Girls
[Guest]: with this conversational interview thing,
[Guest]: which means I was doing interviews
[Guest]: for two, three hours.
[Guest]: And so I wanted the conversation feeling
[Guest]: rather than the interview feeling
[Guest]: to be there.
[Guest]: So that's really why the choices
[Guest]: of camera angle were made in that way.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about feminism.
[Amit Varma]: Like in your film,
[Amit Varma]: you ask, I think, Urvashi,
[Amit Varma]: the very direct question,
[Amit Varma]: how did she become a feminist?
[Amit Varma]: So since you have asked her
[Amit Varma]: that almost seemingly lame question,
[Amit Varma]: it gives me the freedom to ask you.
[Guest]: How did you become a feminist?
[Guest]: Obviously, I don't know the answer to it
[Guest]: because I think I always naturally was
[Guest]: naturally born feminist.
[Guest]: But I think, you know,
[Guest]: I arrived at the idea of feminism
[Guest]: in a very strong way
[Guest]: through the feeling of not belonging
[Guest]: to whatever were the normative structures.
[Guest]: Not because I was cast out of them necessarily.
[Guest]: Although, yes, in part,
[Guest]: I didn't fit in many, many senses.
[Guest]: But because I also didn't like them.
[Guest]: Like I didn't feel comfortable.
[Guest]: I didn't feel comfortable being
[Guest]: the fat girl who's always supposed to be jolly
[Guest]: and please everybody and say,
[Guest]: I know, I know I'm fat,
[Guest]: but that doesn't mean I'm going to try
[Guest]: and look good.
[Guest]: Don't worry.
[Guest]: Meaning I didn't want to fit
[Guest]: into all those categories.
[Guest]: I didn't want to be the entertaining person
[Guest]: who's also not very intellectual
[Guest]: or the intellectual person
[Guest]: who's automatically boring.
[Guest]: Like I didn't want to fit in any boxes.
[Guest]: And I think that's where it started for me
[Guest]: that I won't fit in the box
[Guest]: and I don't feel this way.
[Guest]: So why can't I say it?
[Guest]: I want to do this.
[Guest]: So why can't I do it?
[Guest]: I blame my parents because
[Guest]: I grew up in a household
[Guest]: where pleasure was paramount.
[Guest]: You were encouraged at a very early age.
[Guest]: Not encouraged,
[Guest]: but it was just the way everybody was.
[Guest]: What do you like?
[Guest]: What music do you like?
[Guest]: What do you feel like wearing?
[Guest]: What your tastes were
[Guest]: and what your enjoyment was,
[Guest]: was given a lot of importance in my house,
[Guest]: both in my father's house
[Guest]: and my mother's house.
[Guest]: So there was that
[Guest]: and there was the fact
[Guest]: that my grandparents were both in the movies
[Guest]: and my grandparents were separated.
[Guest]: So I also had this kind of a model
[Guest]: of unconventionality in a more literal sense.
[Guest]: And I felt that I got a lot out of that.
[Guest]: I got to be whoever I was
[Guest]: because of the world,
[Guest]: because of all these things.
[Guest]: And I think the more that other people described me,
[Guest]: the more irritated I would feel.
[Guest]: And the need to describe myself
[Guest]: on my own terms was very, very important.
[Guest]: And I think that led me to feminism
[Guest]: in a more formal sense.
[Guest]: I don't think, I mean,
[Guest]: although because people think
[Guest]: in more conventional ways,
[Guest]: it's not like all my work
[Guest]: has head-on addressed feminism
[Guest]: or feminist issues.
[Guest]: I don't think of feminism as a topic.
[Guest]: I think of it as a lens.
[Guest]: And it's a way of asking questions,
[Guest]: as Fearless says in the film.
[Guest]: It's not the answer.
[Guest]: It is the question.
[Guest]: So feminism's always a question
[Guest]: that I bring to something.
[Guest]: And it can be to filmmaking.
[Guest]: It can be to the way we talk to each other.
[Guest]: It can be to the way I dress.
[Guest]: It can be to thinking about
[Guest]: how to decorate my house even sometimes.
[Guest]: And of course,
[Guest]: to think about how politics works.
[Guest]: So I think that is what made me a feminist.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and in your film,
[Amit Varma]: you have a character musing about
[Amit Varma]: is feminism a choice?
[Amit Varma]: Can you choose to be a feminist?
[Amit Varma]: And your position on that seems to be,
[Amit Varma]: you use the phrase,
[Amit Varma]: live feminism,
[Amit Varma]: that your feminism is something lived.
[Amit Varma]: And your position on that seems to be
[Amit Varma]: that you have no,
[Amit Varma]: that once you realize you're a feminist,
[Amit Varma]: you're a feminist.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a choice.
[Amit Varma]: And I equate it to, for example,
[Amit Varma]: my atheism,
[Amit Varma]: that you don't choose to be an atheist.
[Amit Varma]: You just figure out one day that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, all this is bullshit.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: why should I believe in some,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: So it's not a label that you walk into.
[Amit Varma]: It's a label that you find
[Guest]: to describe yourself.
[Guest]: There is a character actually in Unlimited Girls
[Guest]: who says that.
[Guest]: I won't be defined.
[Guest]: I'd be described
[Guest]: by being called a feminist.
[Guest]: And I felt that was a very powerful thing she said.
[Guest]: That something,
[Guest]: that you say,
[Guest]: oh, that's what I am.
[Guest]: That's the name for people like me, right?
[Guest]: And it's very important
[Guest]: to find that for yourself.
[Guest]: That's not the only thing I am,
[Amit Varma]: is also what people are saying.
[Amit Varma]: And another interesting take
[Amit Varma]: I found in the film,
[Amit Varma]: which is also relevant
[Amit Varma]: in modern times,
[Amit Varma]: is where one character talks about how,
[Amit Varma]: I think fearless only,
[Amit Varma]: where you'd like to
[Amit Varma]: define feminism by,
[Amit Varma]: quote,
[Amit Varma]: identifying yourself through the things
[Amit Varma]: that you like,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas a lot of modern feminism,
[Amit Varma]: and in fact,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of modern Hindutva,
[Amit Varma]: seems to be defining itself
[Amit Varma]: by the things
[Amit Varma]: that it is in opposition to.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: Actually,
[Guest]: Urvashi Butalia also says this in her interview,
[Guest]: that, you know,
[Guest]: we knew what we didn't want,
[Guest]: but we didn't always know
[Guest]: what we did want.
[Guest]: And that was difficult.
[Guest]: I think we all have to be so careful
[Guest]: not to become scolds,
[Guest]: because then we'd all become
[Guest]: dhariwala men, you know,
[Guest]: like always telling other people
[Guest]: how you ought to be.
[Guest]: I think of feminism as an idea
[Guest]: which really gives you a lot of play
[Guest]: in thinking what kind of person
[Guest]: you want to become.
[Guest]: Do you want to fit into
[Guest]: the predefined schemas
[Guest]: of gender that society offers you?
[Guest]: Or do you think that you actually
[Guest]: can walk down a road and figure out,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: which flower you are in the garden of life
[Guest]: in a way, so to speak,
[Guest]: that everything is not in these neat
[Guest]: beds that...
[Guest]: So I think that feminism is,
[Guest]: and for women,
[Guest]: because it is something that was drawn
[Guest]: from the experiences of women,
[Guest]: hence it has certain tenets.
[Guest]: It's not that it's just everything.
[Guest]: Just because I say I'm a feminist
[Guest]: doesn't mean every single thing
[Guest]: that I do will be feminist.
[Guest]: And I think that's something
[Guest]: to be very careful of,
[Guest]: because you should not go
[Guest]: into that purest,
[Guest]: basically inquisitorial mode,
[Guest]: that I am the priest of this thing
[Guest]: and now I will see
[Guest]: whether you are pure enough or not.
[Guest]: It's something like a fantastic
[Guest]: magic thingy,
[Amit Varma]: like something in Harry Potter.
[Amit Varma]: And because you're feminist,
[Amit Varma]: you can both do things
[Amit Varma]: which are feminist
[Amit Varma]: and do things which are just things
[Guest]: and do things which are not
[Guest]: feminist at times.
[Guest]: So you're not...
[Guest]: Once I went on a date with a guy
[Guest]: who kept asking me, like,
[Guest]: one after the other, like,
[Guest]: so what do you feel about 498A?
[Guest]: But what about this?
[Guest]: But don't you think that...
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: after that I was like,
[Guest]: okay, you know,
[Guest]: I'm not like the feminist
[Amit Varma]: answer generator here.
[Amit Varma]: Can we just talk about...
[Amit Varma]: Somebody should build
[Amit Varma]: a feminist answer generator.
[Amit Varma]: Twitter, take that up also.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, it's happening
[Amit Varma]: all over the field.
[Amit Varma]: But I thought I'm a feminist
[Guest]: and I'm just trying to talk about
[Guest]: topics that interest you.
[Guest]: And I was like,
[Guest]: well, a lot of things interest me
[Guest]: and your limited understanding
[Guest]: of feminism
[Guest]: is not really interesting to me.
[Guest]: So that's the other thing, right?
[Guest]: That people never make an effort
[Guest]: to understand what something
[Guest]: that they don't already know is.
[Guest]: So most people define feminism
[Guest]: by 498A is a topic
[Guest]: you're supposed to discuss.
[Guest]: Do feminists hate men or not?
[Guest]: Equality sometimes
[Guest]: enters the conversation.
[Guest]: I want to do something
[Guest]: for the upliftment of women.
[Guest]: This is most people's notion
[Guest]: of feminism, right?
[Guest]: Feminism, those are like
[Guest]: some tiny little dot parts
[Guest]: of feminism.
[Guest]: Feminism is about imagining
[Guest]: a different world.
[Guest]: It's about imagining ourselves
[Guest]: as different people.
[Guest]: It's about reimagining relationships
[Guest]: between people.
[Guest]: And, I mean,
[Guest]: I've often said this,
[Guest]: it's about looking at the world
[Guest]: with a look of love,
[Guest]: giving importance to things
[Guest]: that were not considered important
[Guest]: in the old structures, right?
[Guest]: So for example,
[Guest]: if women sat together
[Guest]: and discussed their personal experiences
[Guest]: and understood,
[Guest]: hey, this is not happening
[Guest]: only to me.
[Guest]: It's happening to many women
[Guest]: and it's happening to us
[Guest]: because we are women.
[Guest]: There was a click moment
[Guest]: for everybody.
[Guest]: They felt a sense
[Guest]: of coming together.
[Guest]: This oral experience,
[Guest]: which was never given
[Guest]: any importance, you know,
[Guest]: in a world where everything
[Guest]: has to be written.
[Guest]: The fact that I have
[Guest]: experienced something,
[Guest]: my experience was given importance.
[Guest]: It contributed to an understanding
[Guest]: of the world, right?
[Guest]: This is something
[Guest]: that happened in the movement
[Guest]: and it happens in oral culture
[Guest]: with many communities, right?
[Guest]: Adivasi communities.
[Guest]: We have sung songs
[Guest]: and remembered people
[Guest]: for a long time.
[Guest]: We give that importance,
[Guest]: let's say.
[Guest]: So I feel like
[Guest]: this way of thinking
[Guest]: is very central to feminism.
[Guest]: The personal is political
[Guest]: and the political is personal.
[Guest]: That you make sense
[Guest]: of the world
[Guest]: also through your
[Guest]: own experiential relationship
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: And that's also why
[Guest]: the unspoken,
[Guest]: or the unseen,
[Guest]: as you might say,
[Guest]: is important in feminism.
[Guest]: That you may be
[Guest]: talking to me respectfully,
[Guest]: but I may feel disrespected.
[Guest]: You may say that,
[Guest]: like the person
[Guest]: who was asking about 498A,
[Guest]: et cetera,
[Guest]: perhaps thought that
[Guest]: they were trying to
[Guest]: talk to me about feminist topics.
[Guest]: But actually,
[Guest]: I was finding it
[Guest]: violent and annoying
[Guest]: because I just thought like,
[Guest]: you're not even trying
[Guest]: to understand what I think.
[Guest]: You're just telling me
[Guest]: what you think I think, right?
[Guest]: So in some sense,
[Guest]: it's not doing that.
[Guest]: But allowing a thing's importance
[Guest]: to manifest itself
[Guest]: and to learn about a thing
[Guest]: and then to value it
[Guest]: for what it is.
[Guest]: That's what feminism
[Guest]: enables us to do.
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: that it is important
[Guest]: to read the debates
[Guest]: that have gone into feminism.
[Unknown]: It is important
[Guest]: to read feminist writers.
[Guest]: And there's, you know,
[Guest]: do paise ka feminist ideas
[Guest]: that people espouse.
[Guest]: I don't believe in it.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I'm a highly serious person.
[Guest]: And I believe that
[Guest]: you should study
[Guest]: anything that you're interested in.
[Guest]: Sonal Shukla says
[Guest]: this awesome thing
[Guest]: in Unlimited Girls
[Guest]: and she's at a library,
[Guest]: so it's quite fitting
[Guest]: that she says it.
[Guest]: That, you know,
[Guest]: if any other topic
[Guest]: you would have to read,
[Guest]: you would have to know
[Guest]: the history of something.
[Guest]: You won't say you're an economist,
[Guest]: but you don't read anything
[Guest]: about economy, right?
[Guest]: But for feminism,
[Guest]: everybody feels they can comment on it
[Guest]: without ever, ever
[Guest]: finding out about it.
[Guest]: Including people
[Guest]: who say that they are feminists
[Guest]: who never look at
[Guest]: the history of feminism
[Guest]: in the world,
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: Like, it's okay to just
[Guest]: pick up some stuff
[Guest]: from the ether
[Guest]: and read a few things.
[Guest]: I've had
[Guest]: feminist women,
[Guest]: young feminist women
[Guest]: saying to me,
[Guest]: like, why do I have to read
[Guest]: ten books?
[Guest]: And I'm like,
[Guest]: why don't you want to?
[Guest]: Why don't you want to see
[Guest]: what other people have said?
[Amit Varma]: You don't have to do the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I have the same grouch
[Amit Varma]: about economics that
[Amit Varma]: nobody will comment on,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: how a jet engine works
[Amit Varma]: unless they've actually studied,
[Amit Varma]: you know, that.
[Amit Varma]: But everybody feels like
[Amit Varma]: they're an expert on economics
[Amit Varma]: or kuch bhi bol do.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: I caught you when you just,
[Amit Varma]: earlier you were talking
[Unknown]: and saying,
[Unknown]: I'm entertaining,
[Guest]: bore mat kar yaar.
[Guest]: Now suddenly you're
[Guest]: a highly serious person.
[Amit Varma]: But for a moment
[Amit Varma]: I thought I busted you there.
[Guest]: You didn't bust me.
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Guest]: I think that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: seriousness is the most
[Guest]: entertaining thing
[Amit Varma]: there is in the world, right?
[Guest]: Because it's so rich.
[Guest]: I would bloody well hope so
[Guest]: because I am told
[Amit Varma]: I'm too serious.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Amit Varma]: so I've just launched
[Amit Varma]: this new book show
[Amit Varma]: on Storytel
[Amit Varma]: called The Book Club
[Amit Varma]: and on the second episode
[Amit Varma]: which released yesterday
[Amit Varma]: or which is going to release
[Amit Varma]: the yesterday
[Guest]: of the release of this
[Guest]: but hasn't yet released
[Guest]: at the time.
[Guest]: We're already all lost.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah,
[Amit Varma]: is on a book
[Amit Varma]: I really love,
[Amit Varma]: a woman by
[Amit Varma]: Mary Wollstonecraft
[Amit Varma]: and one of the reasons
[Amit Varma]: I love Wollstonecraft
[Amit Varma]: goes to what you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: which is where
[Amit Varma]: she talks about,
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: first of all,
[Amit Varma]: she's not just
[Amit Varma]: an early feminist.
[Amit Varma]: She's a serious
[Amit Varma]: political philosopher
[Amit Varma]: wasn't given that credit
[Amit Varma]: in her day
[Amit Varma]: because of course
[Amit Varma]: she's a woman
[Amit Varma]: and I wish she was
[Amit Varma]: given that credit today
[Amit Varma]: and what she does,
[Amit Varma]: which I love
[Amit Varma]: is that she takes
[Amit Varma]: ideas from John Locke
[Amit Varma]: who is called
[Amit Varma]: the father of liberalism
[Amit Varma]: and is indeed my hero.
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: where I get my liberalism
[Amit Varma]: from and my notions
[Amit Varma]: and she points out
[Amit Varma]: what in those days
[Amit Varma]: was a radical notion
[Amit Varma]: that human rights
[Amit Varma]: have to apply
[Amit Varma]: to all humans,
[Amit Varma]: not just to men
[Amit Varma]: and she draws
[Amit Varma]: her feminism
[Amit Varma]: so beautifully from there
[Amit Varma]: that it is
[Amit Varma]: immediately apparent
[Amit Varma]: and what I've also
[Amit Varma]: always believed
[Amit Varma]: that if you're liberal
[Amit Varma]: and of course,
[Amit Varma]: the word has many meanings
[Amit Varma]: nowadays,
[Amit Varma]: but in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that I mean
[Amit Varma]: that if you're liberal,
[Amit Varma]: you are by default
[Amit Varma]: a feminist
[Amit Varma]: and this goes to
[Amit Varma]: one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that you said
[Amit Varma]: in your film
[Amit Varma]: where you said,
[Amit Varma]: quote,
[Amit Varma]: you're not talking
[Amit Varma]: about changing
[Amit Varma]: a house,
[Amit Varma]: you're not talking
[Amit Varma]: about changing
[Amit Varma]: the whole house,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: and I've always seen
[Amit Varma]: feminism as not just
[Amit Varma]: something that relates
[Amit Varma]: to women,
[Amit Varma]: but relates to men,
[Amit Varma]: particularly in the sense
[Amit Varma]: of the male gaze
[Amit Varma]: and we are talking
[Amit Varma]: about the seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: and I think
[Amit Varma]: all men live
[Amit Varma]: in a sort of reality,
[Amit Varma]: which is so different
[Amit Varma]: from the way women
[Amit Varma]: live in in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that when women
[Amit Varma]: are out in the street,
[Amit Varma]: they are so much
[Amit Varma]: more hyper aware
[Amit Varma]: of everyone
[Amit Varma]: who's passing them
[Amit Varma]: they are so much
[Amit Varma]: more aware
[Amit Varma]: there being a woman
[Amit Varma]: makes them aware
[Amit Varma]: of so many other things
[Amit Varma]: which are unseen
[Amit Varma]: by men who don't give a shit
[Amit Varma]: who are just nonchalantly
[Amit Varma]: they can walk into a lift
[Amit Varma]: or they can go wherever
[Amit Varma]: I mean,
[Amit Varma]: would you agree
[Guest]: with this sort of?
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: I think men don't look
[Guest]: at their surroundings
[Amit Varma]: because the surroundings
[Guest]: have been built
[Guest]: to facilitate them
[Guest]: and don't threaten them.
[Guest]: Yeah,
[Guest]: they don't threaten them.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: But men feel very threatened
[Guest]: by the presence of women
[Guest]: like there have been
[Guest]: these studies done
[Guest]: where
[Guest]: I'm not saying it
[Guest]: that men have reported
[Guest]: saying that 50%
[Guest]: of the people in the room
[Guest]: were women
[Guest]: when there were only
[Unknown]: like 15%.
[Guest]: So like any women
[Guest]: are too many women
[Guest]: for men, right?
[Guest]: And similarly,
[Guest]: if you have one woman's
[Guest]: perspective,
[Guest]: you feel you did your job.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: like you don't
[Guest]: that there should be
[Guest]: an equal number
[Guest]: or a sizable number
[Guest]: of women
[Guest]: and trans people
[Guest]: and queer people
[Guest]: and all kinds of people
[Guest]: quite effortlessly
[Guest]: speaking
[Guest]: in a newspaper
[Guest]: or on a television show
[Guest]: or part of your
[Guest]: set of interests
[Guest]: or the realities
[Guest]: that you take into account.
[Guest]: This does not seem to occur
[Guest]: to cis heterosexual men,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And to cis men in general.
[Guest]: They're like,
[Guest]: this is normal.
[Guest]: And they believe
[Guest]: that they're feminists
[Guest]: just because
[Guest]: they're not beating their wives.
[Guest]: Basically,
[Guest]: the bar for what makes you
[Guest]: a feminist in men's minds
[Guest]: is so low, right?
[Guest]: And I do think
[Guest]: that men also continue
[Guest]: to get congratulated
[Guest]: for the very,
[Guest]: like people always giving
[Guest]: lollipops to boys
[Guest]: for doing nothing much.
[Amit Varma]: For basic decency at most.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, basic decency.
[Amit Varma]: You suddenly a big hero.
[Guest]: No, he really tries, yeah.
[Guest]: Like I've had like
[Guest]: women also say that to me
[Guest]: that I think so and so
[Guest]: are pretty good.
[Guest]: I'm like,
[Guest]: now that his name
[Guest]: came out in MeToo,
[Guest]: do you still feel good?
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I never imagined.
[Guest]: I'm like, yeah,
[Guest]: come on, dude.
[Guest]: I mean, you are so busy
[Guest]: being grateful to some guy
[Guest]: for, I don't know,
[Guest]: just talking about
[Guest]: sexual violence
[Guest]: or just making dinner
[Guest]: one day
[Guest]: or just like
[Guest]: talking the talk.
[Guest]: Why don't be grateful?
[Guest]: Like be demanding,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: be assertive and say,
[Guest]: hey, you got to shape up.
[Guest]: So anybody who thinks
[Guest]: that a man is well-rounded,
[Guest]: if he has not read
[Guest]: a bunch of women writers,
[Guest]: I really think
[Guest]: you need to change
[Amit Varma]: the way you think.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote in a column
[Amit Varma]: once that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when the whole
[Amit Varma]: MeToo thing happened,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of the men
[Amit Varma]: who were named,
[Amit Varma]: whoever you had met
[Guest]: personally, you knew
[Guest]: you were not surprised.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Well, it's the radar
[Guest]: of men who are not
[Guest]: interested in women
[Guest]: at all for themselves.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pro-forma
[Amit Varma]: interaction they do.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So I never liked them,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I always felt like
[Guest]: he's a solid bore
[Guest]: and he's just going
[Guest]: on and on talking at me.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: I'm very talkative
[Unknown]: as is clear.
[Guest]: And so I think
[Guest]: and he,
[Guest]: I can feel that
[Guest]: he's not interested
[Guest]: in what I have to say.
[Guest]: I can feel it.
[Guest]: And so I don't want
[Guest]: to listen to his boring jokes
[Guest]: and his extremely
[Guest]: ordinary insights.
[Guest]: I think my insights
[Guest]: are better than his insights.
[Guest]: So my ego,
[Guest]: in a sense,
[Guest]: my intellectual ego
[Guest]: allows me to see
[Guest]: that this is not
[Guest]: a person who truly,
[Guest]: truly respects women
[Guest]: as people.
[Guest]: And I have met
[Guest]: enough men
[Guest]: who do respect women
[Guest]: as people to know
[Guest]: that it can be different,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Had I never met
[Guest]: any other kind of man,
[Guest]: had I never had a father
[Guest]: who really liked me
[Guest]: as a person,
[Guest]: even if he was fed up
[Guest]: of all my choices,
[Guest]: perhaps I wouldn't have
[Amit Varma]: known what that looks like.
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned
[Amit Varma]: that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: when you were at your
[Amit Varma]: father's house
[Amit Varma]: and the feminist
[Amit Varma]: asked what you like,
[Amit Varma]: what you wear,
[Amit Varma]: did that play a part
[Amit Varma]: in making you
[Amit Varma]: a feminist by default
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you weren't then
[Amit Varma]: indoctrinated so much
[Guest]: in the ways of patriarchy?
[Guest]: No, not at all.
[Guest]: I mean, of course,
[Guest]: there was some amount
[Guest]: of, you know,
[Guest]: girls, boys thing,
[Guest]: and especially
[Guest]: when you grow older.
[Guest]: But I think I was very
[Guest]: lucky in that sense
[Guest]: that I remember a moment
[Guest]: when I was in the car
[Guest]: with my dad
[Guest]: going to the market
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: And he said to me,
[Guest]: we had just moved to Delhi.
[Guest]: And so we were close
[Guest]: to the rest of the family
[Guest]: for the first time.
[Guest]: And he said,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: you're not going
[Guest]: to grow up
[Guest]: and just get married
[Guest]: after college
[Guest]: like some of your cousins.
[Guest]: You know that, right?
[Guest]: Like you're going
[Guest]: to be somebody.
[Guest]: And how many people's
[Guest]: parents say that to them?
[Amit Varma]: That's lovely.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's fantastic.
[Guest]: And the other very important,
[Guest]: like I have talked about this
[Guest]: often to my friends
[Guest]: moment is,
[Guest]: so my father was really
[Guest]: not very happy
[Guest]: with most of the choices
[Guest]: I made.
[Guest]: And even the way I dressed
[Guest]: and like generally
[Guest]: he did find me quite
[Guest]: like jungly
[Guest]: and what are you doing?
[Guest]: And I was a bit
[Guest]: of a disappointment.
[Guest]: She's such a bright girl.
[Guest]: She's making documentaries.
[Guest]: I don't know if anyone
[Guest]: watches them or not.
[Guest]: And thank God
[Guest]: I started going to America
[Guest]: and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So people thought
[Amit Varma]: that I must be doing something
[Amit Varma]: if other people care about me.
[Amit Varma]: People of this generation
[Unknown]: don't get where going abroad
[Unknown]: is so routine.
[Guest]: But in our generation,
[Guest]: fuck if someone's gone abroad.
[Guest]: It's like validation
[Guest]: of the biggest.
[Unknown]: It's like having 5 million
[Unknown]: Twitter followers.
[Guest]: So one trip
[Guest]: is all you need.
[Unknown]: So,
[Guest]: but the thing is that
[Guest]: I went to a film festival.
[Guest]: My father was very ill.
[Guest]: This was a little
[Guest]: while ago.
[Guest]: He died.
[Guest]: I went to a film festival.
[Guest]: I won an award.
[Guest]: Rare enough occurrence for me.
[Guest]: And then I came back to Delhi
[Guest]: and my friend called
[Guest]: from abroad.
[Guest]: And my father answered
[Guest]: to landlines
[Guest]: and extensions.
[Guest]: So my father
[Guest]: answered the phone upstairs
[Guest]: and I answered
[Guest]: the phone downstairs.
[Guest]: And I was listening
[Guest]: to their conversation
[Guest]: and she said,
[Guest]: uncle,
[Guest]: you must be so proud
[Guest]: of Paramita.
[Guest]: She's going to all these festivals.
[Guest]: She's winning all these
[Guest]: prizes for her films.
[Guest]: He said, yes,
[Guest]: I'm proud of her,
[Guest]: but I'm really proud of her
[Guest]: because she's a very honest girl.
[Guest]: And I thought like,
[Guest]: wow, that is
[Guest]: it's so nice to hear
[Guest]: that your father
[Guest]: sees you as a person.
[Amit Varma]: Did he ever tell you that?
[Guest]: He did.
[Guest]: Actually,
[Guest]: when my father was sick,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: we became,
[Guest]: I mean, we were close,
[Guest]: but there was a lot
[Guest]: of personal conversation
[Guest]: between my dad and I.
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: this was very special.
[Guest]: Like, I think the fact
[Guest]: that my father
[Guest]: was a very emotional person also.
[Guest]: He was not a very
[Guest]: alpha kind of person,
[Guest]: but very caring parent,
[Guest]: all of that.
[Guest]: And the thing is,
[Guest]: this thing,
[Guest]: disagreeing with my choices,
[Guest]: but letting them be.
[Guest]: Not forcing
[Guest]: or trying to force me
[Guest]: to be otherwise.
[Guest]: Continuously complaining also,
[Guest]: like forever.
[Guest]: My father wanting me
[Guest]: to open a PPF account.
[Guest]: I've written a column about it
[Guest]: that he just kept on saying,
[Guest]: beta, open a PPF account.
[Guest]: I'd be like,
[Guest]: I don't have money
[Guest]: to put in a PPF account.
[Unknown]: And then we had
[Unknown]: a very big fight about it.
[Guest]: He said, okay,
[Guest]: I will never tell you again.
[Guest]: You know,
[Guest]: I'm your well-wisher
[Guest]: and you're not listening to me.
[Guest]: I was like, great,
[Guest]: never tell me again.
[Guest]: Thank God.
[Guest]: And three years went by
[Guest]: and my dad never discussed
[Guest]: the PPF account.
[Guest]: And then one day
[Guest]: when I was like relaxed,
[Guest]: he said, beta,
[Guest]: if you would just open
[Guest]: your PPF account.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay,
[Guest]: let's go tomorrow
[Guest]: and open it.
[Guest]: And my father was so,
[Guest]: so happy, right?
[Guest]: So there was a way
[Guest]: in which, yes,
[Guest]: he would complain.
[Guest]: He would try to push me
[Guest]: to do things
[Guest]: that he thought
[Guest]: were the right thing.
[Guest]: But he never forced
[Guest]: a conversation about marriage.
[Guest]: He talked to me about it once.
[Guest]: I said,
[Guest]: I don't want to get married.
[Guest]: He said, but,
[Guest]: and he didn't say you should
[Guest]: because people do it.
[Guest]: He said, but beta,
[Guest]: logon ke sukh-tuk hote hain.
[Guest]: You need to share them
[Guest]: with somebody.
[Guest]: And I said, no, papa,
[Guest]: I think I'll really be okay.
[Guest]: I have a lot of friends
[Guest]: that really think I'll be okay.
[Guest]: And he said, okay,
[Guest]: if you say so.
[Amit Varma]: And he never raised it again.
[Guest]: Amazing.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So I do think
[Guest]: this is very important.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not setting my dad up
[Amit Varma]: as some kind of
[Amit Varma]: great model of feminism.
[Amit Varma]: No, but for a man
[Guest]: of his generation,
[Guest]: like, my God, yeah.
[Guest]: But it was sweetness in him.
[Guest]: It was the ability to love me
[Guest]: that made him do it.
[Guest]: It was not because
[Guest]: of being feminist.
[Guest]: What I'm trying to say
[Guest]: is that he was
[Guest]: a very loving person.
[Guest]: He loved people.
[Guest]: People loved my dad.
[Guest]: He was very caring.
[Guest]: He took his role
[Guest]: as somebody who's an elder person,
[Guest]: thinking about younger people
[Guest]: and it's an important thing to do.
[Guest]: Now, I had older people
[Guest]: look out for me.
[Guest]: It was important for me.
[Guest]: I feel I must do it for others.
[Guest]: I feel that the parenting thing
[Guest]: that we spoke about
[Guest]: in the beginning,
[Guest]: it discourages the idea
[Guest]: that all children
[Guest]: are our children.
[Guest]: That's why it discourages us
[Guest]: from understanding
[Guest]: that public university
[Guest]: is very important
[Guest]: because it's not just
[Guest]: my kid going to Ashoka.
[Guest]: It's about all kids
[Guest]: getting the chance
[Guest]: to study and do well, right?
[Guest]: I should care about it
[Guest]: at a social level.
[Guest]: And I think he had that.
[Guest]: It was a very
[Guest]: ordinary Indian quality,
[Guest]: I think, before.
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: that just created
[Guest]: a sense of
[Guest]: it's okay to be who you are.
[Guest]: You will still be loved, right?
[Guest]: So the question of feminism
[Guest]: that if I'm a feminist,
[Guest]: if I go against everything
[Guest]: that is taught to me,
[Guest]: will anybody still love me?
[Guest]: So when you are taught
[Guest]: at a young age
[Guest]: that you will still be loved,
[Guest]: even though you won't
[Guest]: be agreed with,
[Guest]: this is a very big learning.
[Guest]: And I think that
[Guest]: even though I was an awkward kid,
[Guest]: even though I've had
[Guest]: lots of difficulties fitting in
[Guest]: and continue to be rude to people
[Guest]: and struggle, actually,
[Guest]: with the real world,
[Guest]: so to speak,
[Guest]: I don't think I'm a very savvy person.
[Guest]: And I do find it a struggle.
[Guest]: But it's okay, you know.
[Guest]: I feel that something
[Guest]: or the other will happen.
[Guest]: And I think this was
[Guest]: an early learning.
[Guest]: And I think it's a very
[Guest]: enabling thing for feminism.
[Guest]: Your friends,
[Guest]: having friendships,
[Guest]: being encouraged
[Guest]: to have friendships.
[Guest]: I don't think many families
[Guest]: give kids that, right?
[Guest]: Like, make friends,
[Guest]: go out,
[Guest]: let your friend come over
[Guest]: and stay the night.
[Guest]: You can go and stay the night
[Guest]: at your friend's house.
[Guest]: Very early on,
[Guest]: this kind of social relationships
[Guest]: with others,
[Guest]: my parents had a lot of friends.
[Guest]: So I think these were
[Guest]: great learnings
[Guest]: that helped me
[Guest]: in my feminist journey.
[Amit Varma]: And this empathy
[Amit Varma]: and this openness
[Amit Varma]: to others that you talk about
[Amit Varma]: is, I think, also relevant
[Amit Varma]: in current battles
[Amit Varma]: in feminism nowadays.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, for example,
[Amit Varma]: there was this book
[Amit Varma]: Christina Hoff Sommers
[Amit Varma]: wrote in 1994
[Amit Varma]: where she coined the terms
[Amit Varma]: equity feminism
[Unknown]: and gender feminism,
[Unknown]: which, you know,
[Amit Varma]: for the benefit of my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: I'll quickly give a summary.
[Amit Varma]: Equity feminism basically
[Amit Varma]: comes from the view that
[Amit Varma]: men and women should have
[Amit Varma]: equal treatment
[Amit Varma]: in the eyes of the law
[Amit Varma]: and basically equality
[Amit Varma]: of opportunity
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And gender feminism
[Amit Varma]: looks deeper
[Amit Varma]: at the sort of structures
[Amit Varma]: that have led to
[Amit Varma]: women being oppressed
[Amit Varma]: like the patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And I actually hold
[Amit Varma]: that there is truth to both.
[Amit Varma]: I don't see why
[Amit Varma]: they have to be
[Amit Varma]: two separate things.
[Amit Varma]: But what gender feminism
[Amit Varma]: can also often
[Amit Varma]: go into
[Amit Varma]: is what
[Amit Varma]: is the current
[Amit Varma]: identity politics
[Amit Varma]: of today,
[Amit Varma]: which is not just within feminism
[Amit Varma]: but in different domains.
[Amit Varma]: But what
[Amit Varma]: that identity politics
[Amit Varma]: seems to do
[Amit Varma]: is that as opposed
[Amit Varma]: to the empathetic view,
[Amit Varma]: it takes a view
[Amit Varma]: that others,
[Amit Varma]: the other person,
[Amit Varma]: where suddenly
[Amit Varma]: patriarchy is not only
[Amit Varma]: the enemy,
[Amit Varma]: men are the enemy.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore you have
[Amit Varma]: these very harsh,
[Amit Varma]: strict binaries,
[Amit Varma]: which is why,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: Steven Pinker in his book
[Amit Varma]: The Blank Slate
[Amit Varma]: had once speculated
[Amit Varma]: that the reason
[Amit Varma]: behind the bizarre thing
[Amit Varma]: that a lot of women say
[Amit Varma]: they are not feminists
[Amit Varma]: is that they are put off
[Amit Varma]: by this second kind
[Amit Varma]: of feminism
[Amit Varma]: where you are treating
[Amit Varma]: men as the enemy
[Amit Varma]: and treating yourself
[Amit Varma]: as a victim.
[Amit Varma]: And that actually,
[Amit Varma]: like,
[Amit Varma]: I, of course,
[Amit Varma]: look at feminism
[Amit Varma]: from the Lockian,
[Amit Varma]: Wallstonecraft,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Unknown]: equity feminist kind of way.
[Amit Varma]: Shit, you're smiling
[Amit Varma]: like you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: man is there.
[Guest]: But I'm just sort of,
[Guest]: yeah,
[Amit Varma]: so that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: how I look at it
[Amit Varma]: from my individual rights view,
[Amit Varma]: which all my listeners
[Amit Varma]: are sort of aware of.
[Amit Varma]: But there is also
[Amit Varma]: this identity politics,
[Amit Varma]: which I think
[Amit Varma]: is in opposition to this
[Amit Varma]: because like I understand
[Amit Varma]: that identity politics
[Amit Varma]: is real.
[Amit Varma]: It's all around us.
[Amit Varma]: We suffer from it.
[Amit Varma]: Women suffer from it.
[Amit Varma]: But I think the answer
[Amit Varma]: to identity politics
[Amit Varma]: is on emphasizing
[Amit Varma]: individual rights
[Amit Varma]: and the autonomy
[Amit Varma]: and dignity of every individual.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think
[Amit Varma]: that you can
[Amit Varma]: fight identity politics
[Amit Varma]: with an equal
[Amit Varma]: and opposite identity politics
[Amit Varma]: because you just then
[Amit Varma]: enter into warfare.
[Guest]: I think that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: to go back to the discussion
[Guest]: about how feminism
[Guest]: gives value
[Guest]: to many different things
[Guest]: and in that sense
[Guest]: is an inherently queer
[Guest]: theory
[Guest]: because it says
[Guest]: that there is not
[Guest]: only one way.
[Guest]: Patriarchy insists
[Guest]: on these unitary identities
[Guest]: and hierarchies, right?
[Guest]: That one thing
[Guest]: is more important
[Guest]: than another thing.
[Guest]: Whereas feminism actually
[Guest]: says there are different values.
[Guest]: Everything has its own
[Guest]: different value
[Guest]: and its own place
[Guest]: in a way, right?
[Guest]: So, I think that
[Guest]: identity politics
[Guest]: is very important
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: when you're talking
[Guest]: about a rights framework,
[Guest]: we do live in societies
[Guest]: that afford rights to people
[Guest]: and where some people
[Guest]: get more rights
[Guest]: or some rights
[Guest]: don't work for people
[Guest]: because they don't
[Guest]: take into account
[Guest]: centuries of inequality,
[Guest]: structures that are
[Guest]: rooted in that inequality
[Guest]: and to replicate inequality.
[Guest]: I once worked
[Guest]: in a television company
[Guest]: for a short time
[Guest]: when I was making that show
[Guest]: and I was appalled
[Guest]: at how the structure
[Guest]: is essentially constructed
[Guest]: to produce mediocrity.
[Guest]: It's not that people
[Guest]: want to be mediocre
[Guest]: but anybody who is
[Guest]: not going to be mediocre
[Guest]: is going to suffer
[Guest]: and is going to be
[Amit Varma]: disliked by that system.
[Amit Varma]: Which is actually a structure
[Guest]: at a lot of big corporations.
[Guest]: Yes, it's corporate structure.
[Guest]: That's definitely true.
[Guest]: So I feel like similarly
[Guest]: patriarchy is also
[Guest]: a corporate structure
[Guest]: which is designed
[Guest]: to create mediocrity actually
[Guest]: and call it meritocracy.
[Guest]: Caste is that kind
[Guest]: of a structure.
[Guest]: It creates mediocrity
[Guest]: but says it's merit.
[Guest]: So I think that
[Guest]: identity politics
[Guest]: is important
[Guest]: when we are talking
[Guest]: about rights
[Guest]: so that we can foreground
[Guest]: that there are
[Guest]: diverse populations
[Guest]: with diverse
[Guest]: sets of experiences
[Guest]: and they all need
[Guest]: to come to rights
[Guest]: from a different place.
[Guest]: That rights are not also
[Guest]: some unitary kind of notion.
[Guest]: It's important to challenge
[Guest]: also day-to-day
[Guest]: normalizations of
[Guest]: social relations
[Guest]: which we don't question.
[Guest]: I don't agree
[Guest]: that women don't like
[Guest]: to say they are feminists
[Guest]: because they feel
[Guest]: it's a man-hating thing.
[Guest]: I think women who fear
[Guest]: losing privilege
[Guest]: and privilege
[Guest]: always accrues from men.
[Guest]: Unfortunately,
[Guest]: we are still in a world
[Guest]: where men get to decide
[Guest]: what's important and not.
[Guest]: You would have to be
[Guest]: really bloody-minded
[Guest]: person like me
[Guest]: who says I really
[Guest]: do not care what men think.
[Guest]: In fact, I don't care
[Guest]: what anybody thinks.
[Guest]: I think this is important.
[Guest]: I'm going to do it, right?
[Guest]: So I think that's got
[Guest]: its own costs
[Guest]: and its own advantages.
[Guest]: But essentially,
[Guest]: men decide if you're important,
[Guest]: if a man chooses you,
[Guest]: decides to look at you,
[Guest]: listen to you,
[Guest]: you feel you are important.
[Guest]: So those who are still
[Guest]: very tied to that power structure
[Guest]: fear losing the privileges
[Guest]: by stepping away from it.
[Guest]: They are very well aware
[Guest]: that they will lose
[Guest]: their privileges.
[Guest]: They will not be part
[Guest]: of that scene.
[Guest]: Sooner or later,
[Guest]: when you get beaten up
[Guest]: by the police,
[Guest]: they leave that scene.
[Guest]: I feel, you know,
[Guest]: that's what I see happening
[Guest]: with a lot of older women
[Guest]: who've not left
[Guest]: the privilege structure.
[Guest]: That said,
[Guest]: eventually identity politics
[Guest]: also has to, I feel,
[Guest]: what you're calling empathy,
[Guest]: I would call imagination,
[Guest]: which is the point of it is
[Guest]: to loosen the grip
[Guest]: of that identity on yourself.
[Guest]: And it's very difficult
[Guest]: to imagine yourself changing
[Guest]: if you can't imagine
[Guest]: other people changing.
[Guest]: So you have to conceptualise change
[Guest]: within identity politics.
[Guest]: And that's got to somehow
[Guest]: at some point.
[Guest]: See, there's an evolutionary
[Guest]: thing also, right?
[Guest]: So there'll be an evolutionary
[Guest]: moment where there'll be
[Guest]: a lot of anger
[Guest]: and hardline positions
[Guest]: and a feeling of enmity
[Guest]: because there is an enmity,
[Guest]: actually.
[Guest]: People, identities are
[Guest]: inimical to each other.
[Guest]: My expressing myself
[Guest]: in certain ways
[Guest]: has to be done
[Guest]: with difficulty
[Guest]: because the world doesn't let me.
[Guest]: So in that sense,
[Guest]: there is an enmity
[Guest]: and the world is inimical
[Guest]: to my progress.
[Guest]: So there will be a time
[Guest]: of conflict.
[Guest]: But yes, of course,
[Guest]: we cannot harden into that
[Guest]: because then we are
[Guest]: not going to be able to change.
[Guest]: Even I can't change
[Guest]: if I can't imagine
[Guest]: that you can change, right?
[Guest]: So in order to have
[Guest]: that imagination of change,
[Guest]: what's the language
[Guest]: of conversation
[Guest]: we are going to have?
[Guest]: How am I going to point out
[Guest]: your privilege to you
[Guest]: without saying that
[Guest]: you are incapable of changing?
[Amit Varma]: This really becomes a question.
[Amit Varma]: Or rather, how are you going
[Amit Varma]: to point out my privilege to me
[Amit Varma]: without me feeling
[Amit Varma]: that you're attacking me personally?
[Guest]: Well, how are you going
[Guest]: to look at your own privilege?
[Guest]: Or how are you going to learn
[Guest]: not to feel attacked
[Guest]: when your privilege is pointed out
[Guest]: is also a way I can put it, right?
[Guest]: I think a lot of people
[Guest]: feel attacked just by having
[Guest]: their privilege pointed out.
[Guest]: And to some extent,
[Guest]: you have to get over it.
[Guest]: So to go back to the time
[Guest]: when I got trolled,
[Guest]: for a minute,
[Guest]: I did stop to think like,
[Guest]: why did I get trolled so badly?
[Guest]: I wasn't doing that.
[Guest]: That's what I meant.
[Guest]: And I say that.
[Guest]: I don't think it was fair
[Guest]: what happened to me.
[Guest]: But I could see.
[Guest]: A friend of mine
[Guest]: was very irritated with me
[Guest]: and said, don't do that.
[Guest]: Don't see his point of view
[Guest]: because that's like just,
[Guest]: you know, hurting yourself.
[Guest]: And I'm like, actually,
[Guest]: I don't agree with him,
[Guest]: but I see where he's coming from.
[Guest]: And I have some other gain
[Guest]: about thinking this through, you know.
[Guest]: So without going into details about that,
[Guest]: I just feel like
[Guest]: it's not always the onus on me
[Guest]: to attack you nicely.
[Guest]: It's always also the onus on you
[Guest]: to not be reactive to my attack.
[Guest]: And that is also why I think
[Guest]: the look of love is important.
[Guest]: That sometimes
[Guest]: when somebody attacks us,
[Guest]: we also have to look at them
[Guest]: with the thought that,
[Guest]: oh my God, there's decades of privilege.
[Guest]: I mean, centuries of privilege on my side
[Guest]: and centuries of lack of privilege
[Guest]: on the other.
[Guest]: For one second,
[Guest]: let me not get upset.
[Guest]: It's upsetting,
[Guest]: but let me not act on my upset.
[Guest]: I mean, one can also conceptualize that,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And I think it is, again,
[Guest]: a two-way street, right?
[Guest]: If you forever and ever,
[Guest]: despite my trying,
[Guest]: say that, oh, you cannot change,
[Guest]: then no change is possible,
[Guest]: because without unmaking privilege,
[Guest]: how will we remake privileges?
[Guest]: So I think this is an important question,
[Guest]: but I would say, again,
[Guest]: it's not a question of interaction.
[Guest]: It is a question of imagination.
[Guest]: And for example,
[Guest]: the term toxic masculinity,
[Guest]: which after some time
[Guest]: starts to stand in for all of masculinity,
[Guest]: that masculinity is automatically toxic.
[Guest]: When I have that imagination of masculinity,
[Guest]: I'm basically telling you,
[Guest]: you can't change.
[Guest]: If you're a man,
[Guest]: well, until the great feminist utopia arrives,
[Guest]: you are doomed.
[Guest]: You know, so this determinism,
[Guest]: I think, is an absence of imagination.
[Guest]: I wrote a comic about acid attack victims, right?
[Guest]: And in which the main character,
[Guest]: I mean, the main villain,
[Guest]: was called Ahamkara,
[Guest]: and he spews acid.
[Guest]: Like, it's very complicated.
[Guest]: He gets a boon,
[Guest]: and somebody makes him drink acid,
[Amit Varma]: but basically he becomes this guy.
[Amit Varma]: Ahamkara spewing acid, though,
[Guest]: is very well done.
[Guest]: So he is continuously,
[Guest]: like, he has a power to spew acid.
[Guest]: And then he brings all these women
[Guest]: who are victims of acid attack
[Guest]: into this island,
[Guest]: where he says,
[Guest]: nobody wants you,
[Guest]: I will look after you.
[Guest]: Now, this is actually
[Guest]: a liberal kind of position at one level.
[Guest]: So it's not what you imagine.
[Guest]: The protector of these women
[Guest]: will actually be weakening them
[Guest]: by saying,
[Guest]: nobody wants you.
[Guest]: And then Priya,
[Guest]: who's a superheroine
[Guest]: who comes and saves them,
[Guest]: she actually has this mirror,
[Guest]: magic mirror,
[Guest]: and it's the mirror of love.
[Guest]: So when you look at yourself in the mirror,
[Guest]: you see what you really are from inside.
[Guest]: And you're reminded
[Guest]: that you are not only the wound
[Guest]: that you have sustained,
[Guest]: but you're much more than that.
[Guest]: And you liberate yourself
[Guest]: from Ahamkara's grip.
[Guest]: When the women liberate themselves
[Guest]: from Ahamkara's grip,
[Guest]: Ahamkara ceases to be a demon.
[Guest]: He becomes very diminished.
[Guest]: And Priya gives him the mirror
[Guest]: and says, look at yourself.
[Guest]: And he refuses.
[Guest]: And she leaves the mirror with him
[Guest]: and all the women leave.
[Guest]: And she's like,
[Guest]: maybe one day he will look at it.
[Guest]: So for me,
[Guest]: it was always the conception
[Guest]: that Ahamkara could change if he wants.
[Guest]: They don't want to sit here
[Guest]: and now try to reform him.
[Guest]: They have liberated themselves.
[Guest]: They're off.
[Guest]: Now, if he wants to sit
[Guest]: on his stupid acid island
[Guest]: and feel sorry for himself,
[Amit Varma]: that's his problem.
[Amit Varma]: I think the diminution of Ahamkara
[Amit Varma]: should be everybody's personal quest.
[Amit Varma]: I just want to say
[Amit Varma]: I agree with everything you said.
[Amit Varma]: The clarification I want to make though
[Amit Varma]: is that what I meant about identity politics
[Amit Varma]: is that one, it is real.
[Amit Varma]: All these structures you speak about,
[Amit Varma]: the oppression of the patriarchy
[Amit Varma]: and so on are all real, indisputable.
[Amit Varma]: I think they are very useful
[Amit Varma]: at the level of analysis.
[Amit Varma]: I think when you actually start engaging,
[Amit Varma]: bringing identity politics
[Amit Varma]: can become a bit of an issue.
[Amit Varma]: For example,
[Amit Varma]: if I am in a discussion online
[Amit Varma]: and people are saying,
[Amit Varma]: check your privilege,
[Amit Varma]: that stops the conversation immediately.
[Amit Varma]: When people say that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, you are Savarna, shut up.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm immediately removed
[Amit Varma]: from the conversation.
[Amit Varma]: That stops the conversation immediately.
[Amit Varma]: It might be true
[Amit Varma]: that what I am saying
[Amit Varma]: is influenced by my privilege,
[Amit Varma]: but bringing it up,
[Amit Varma]: I think poisons the discourse
[Amit Varma]: because I strongly feel
[Amit Varma]: that the discourse
[Amit Varma]: should always center on argument
[Amit Varma]: and not on the people
[Amit Varma]: making the argument.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense,
[Amit Varma]: I think identity politics
[Amit Varma]: at the level of analysis
[Amit Varma]: and just understanding
[Amit Varma]: what is wrong with our world
[Amit Varma]: is essential.
[Amit Varma]: But at the level of action
[Amit Varma]: and actually bringing
[Amit Varma]: that identity politics
[Amit Varma]: by othering people
[Amit Varma]: and treating them with contempt,
[Amit Varma]: even if they are the people
[Amit Varma]: with privileges and positions in power,
[Amit Varma]: doesn't help the discourse
[Guest]: and therefore hinders change.
[Guest]: I mean, I think contempt
[Guest]: always hinders change.
[Guest]: So I would agree with you there.
[Guest]: Check your privilege
[Guest]: has come to be a term
[Guest]: of stopping people from talking
[Guest]: rather than a term
[Guest]: that is just what it is.
[Unknown]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So I think like all of these things,
[Guest]: like toxic masculinity,
[Guest]: which has come to be
[Guest]: a meaningless term, right?
[Guest]: You just use it.
[Guest]: You just chop it on anything
[Amit Varma]: and then that's it.
[Guest]: Actually, I use it a fair bit.
[Guest]: I don't.
[Amit Varma]: I am like I am car.
[Amit Varma]: I am getting so diminished
[Guest]: by this conversation with you.
[Guest]: So I just feel like
[Guest]: it's very like
[Guest]: I think we should all
[Guest]: think a little bit
[Guest]: about the language we use.
[Guest]: I agree with you
[Guest]: that is this language
[Guest]: conceptualizing a movement forward
[Guest]: or is it not?
[Guest]: And you know,
[Guest]: I wouldn't argue with you
[Guest]: if I feel like many right wing people
[Guest]: when they say horrible things to me,
[Guest]: my latest ploy is to say
[Guest]: you are being very silly
[Guest]: or like you should behave
[Guest]: like a grown up or something.
[Guest]: Then they get a little confused
[Guest]: by this auntie kind of response.
[Amit Varma]: But I think millennials
[Amit Varma]: won't know what it is,
[Amit Varma]: but you were auntie 303.
[Amit Varma]: I was auntie 303.
[Amit Varma]: Look it up young kids
[Guest]: who don't know what that is.
[Guest]: So we might come up
[Guest]: with the various modes
[Guest]: of engagement, right?
[Guest]: But I feel like, yeah,
[Guest]: if there is a person
[Guest]: who's unable to see
[Guest]: their limitations,
[Guest]: I usually don't engage
[Guest]: with them at all.
[Guest]: I don't have a great desire
[Guest]: to engage with them.
[Guest]: And I do feel
[Guest]: there's a lot of worth
[Guest]: in sometimes not engaging.
[Guest]: So I feel the compulsory engagement
[Guest]: which happens online
[Guest]: is what also drives us
[Guest]: to these absolute positions,
[Guest]: which makes it impossible
[Guest]: to have a conversation
[Guest]: that imagines change.
[Guest]: And I think that, yes,
[Guest]: if you spend less time
[Guest]: thinking about the other,
[Guest]: which is a little bit different
[Guest]: than what you're saying,
[Guest]: which is othering people,
[Guest]: there is an other
[Guest]: and there is a self
[Guest]: in everything.
[Guest]: So if you find that somebody else
[Guest]: is very bothersome
[Guest]: and their identity
[Guest]: is preventing them
[Guest]: from seeing you in a certain way,
[Guest]: I would not engage with them.
[Guest]: I would rather grow my own stuff
[Guest]: and force them to engage with me.
[Guest]: The lawyer Flavia Agnes
[Guest]: did a very interesting thing.
[Guest]: I made a film on two of her clients.
[Guest]: And one of her clients,
[Guest]: her husband,
[Guest]: tried to kill her
[Guest]: or some drama happened.
[Guest]: Then he had a girlfriend
[Guest]: whom he brought into the house
[Guest]: and he threw this woman,
[Guest]: his wife, out of the house.
[Guest]: So she went to Flavia saying,
[Guest]: I want a divorce.
[Guest]: And Flavia was like,
[Guest]: do you want a divorce?
[Guest]: Or do you need a house to live in?
[Guest]: Like, which is the thing you want?
[Guest]: So she felt,
[Guest]: OK, I've been thrown out of the house.
[Guest]: I've been treated badly.
[Guest]: I don't want this man.
[Guest]: But really, what did that do?
[Guest]: That left everything
[Guest]: on the man's terms.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't want her either, right?
[Guest]: He wins if he gets a divorce.
[Guest]: But she needed a house to live in.
[Guest]: Like, that house was also hers.
[Guest]: So Flavia was like,
[Guest]: see, if you're back in the house,
[Guest]: I can get a stay order.
[Guest]: He cannot throw you out of the house.
[Guest]: But once you're out of the house,
[Guest]: it's difficult for me to get an order
[Guest]: to go back into the house.
[Guest]: So you must first go back into the house.
[Guest]: So she went back into the house,
[Guest]: like she, whatever,
[Guest]: had the key and all that.
[Guest]: And after that, a stay order.
[Guest]: And then the judge was like,
[Guest]: OK, you have to separate the house
[Guest]: into two sections,
[Guest]: her section and his section.
[Guest]: And he harassed her like crazy
[Guest]: while she was there.
[Guest]: But she had to stand strong.
[Guest]: So finally, he was like,
[Guest]: OK, what will it take for you
[Guest]: to give me a divorce?
[Guest]: And then he was like,
[Guest]: OK, now we'll talk, right?
[Guest]: So there is a way in which you don't,
[Guest]: you're bad.
[Guest]: It's not, I'm good.
[Guest]: That's what I need.
[Guest]: That's what I'm going to do.
[Guest]: To bring the other person to your terms,
[Guest]: I think is a very important
[Guest]: political effort.
[Guest]: And so, yes, I know argument,
[Guest]: nicety, all of those things
[Guest]: matter to me as well.
[Guest]: Empathy is very important to me.
[Guest]: But I think that the real heart of politics
[Guest]: is about strengthening yourself,
[Guest]: strengthening your position,
[Guest]: and then getting people to talk to you
[Guest]: on your terms instead of
[Guest]: always falling into their terms.
[Guest]: What is happening today
[Guest]: with the protests
[Guest]: is that instead of immediately
[Guest]: falling victim to the right-wing agenda
[Guest]: and then getting into
[Guest]: those meaningless arguments,
[Guest]: people are like, ha ha ha, joke,
[Guest]: ha ha ha, poem,
[Guest]: something, something.
[Guest]: So the terms of the discourse are changing.
[Guest]: And that is the really
[Guest]: revolutionary thing about it.
[Amit Varma]: And really, the flowering of art
[Amit Varma]: is the one silver lining in all of this
[Amit Varma]: because the cartoons, the poetry,
[Guest]: hum kaagas nahi dikhayenge.
[Guest]: But art is the place, right,
[Amit Varma]: where change happens,
[Guest]: where what is coming and what is going
[Guest]: can do so in a much more fluid way, right?
[Amit Varma]: And you have made my job easier
[Amit Varma]: because this is such a lovely segue
[Amit Varma]: into the influence of popular culture
[Amit Varma]: on you and on, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and on your work.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for that happenstance.
[Unknown]: You're welcome.
[Unknown]: I was wondering ki kaise cut kare abhi.
[Guest]: Madam toh itni films mein
[Amit Varma]: itni fluidly kar leti hai.
[Guest]: Lekin hum podcast mein first going home.
[Guest]: Dekho maine kar hi liya.
[Guest]: People do everything for men.
[Guest]: What to do?
[Guest]: Ha ha ha.
[Amit Varma]: Kuch bhi nahi kar paate aapne aap.
[Amit Varma]: Well, shows your empathy.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for that.
[Amit Varma]: So, yeah, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you've engaged with popular culture
[Amit Varma]: at a very serious level.
[Amit Varma]: You haven't sat back and said
[Amit Varma]: ki nahi yeh misogyny hai,
[Amit Varma]: yeh yeh hai, yeh wo hai.
[Amit Varma]: You know, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: all the cliches about containing multitudes,
[Amit Varma]: but you have loved popular culture.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the very fact that you wrote
[Amit Varma]: flashback presumably with our old friend
[Amit Varma]: Imtiaz Baghdadi,
[Amit Varma]: the great researcher,
[Amit Varma]: is just a sign of that love.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: recently you wrote a column on SRK
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, how his evolution
[Amit Varma]: mirrors evolution of middle class India.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote a similar thing about rom-coms,
[Amit Varma]: how they also mirror the...
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about the influence
[Amit Varma]: popular culture has had on you.
[Amit Varma]: And have you always loved it?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a point at which you sat back
[Amit Varma]: and started thinking about,
[Amit Varma]: looking at it with a critical gaze?
[Amit Varma]: And what did you then find
[Guest]: when you did that?
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: I think it's interesting that...
[Guest]: So I didn't ever think of myself
[Guest]: as outside of popular culture, right?
[Guest]: Like most young people,
[Guest]: the big thing was radio in my youth.
[Guest]: And then there would be just like...
[Guest]: It was so difficult to get Western music
[Guest]: when I was a teenager.
[Guest]: And there were these two programs on radio
[Guest]: called Play It Cool and In The Groove.
[Guest]: In The Groove came in the evening
[Guest]: and Play It Cool came in the morning.
[Guest]: So I would listen to them
[Guest]: and then you would copy down
[Guest]: the lyrics of songs
[Guest]: because you didn't know
[Unknown]: when that song would come again
[Unknown]: and when you would get to hear the song, right?
[Guest]: So that thing of trying to have the song.
[Amit Varma]: I think you kids listening to this today
[Amit Varma]: should kindly realize
[Amit Varma]: how freaking lucky you are.
[Amit Varma]: You can listen to any song
[Guest]: anytime you want.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, that's another of the things
[Guest]: about YouTube that I love
[Guest]: that I can listen to any song I want.
[Guest]: Recently, somebody asked me
[Guest]: what I wanted for my birthday
[Guest]: and I said, I want a CD player
[Guest]: and they were like,
[Guest]: who even has a CD player anymore?
[Guest]: And I'm like, well, I have 500 CDs,
[Guest]: so I need a CD player, right?
[Guest]: But the thing is that
[Guest]: this idea that culture
[Guest]: is just what you like.
[Guest]: Popular culture is what you like.
[Guest]: You do it very effortlessly
[Guest]: when you're young.
[Guest]: It's only later on
[Guest]: that you start getting told
[Guest]: that something is high culture,
[Guest]: something is low culture,
[Guest]: you shouldn't like this.
[Guest]: But definitely, I am the generation
[Guest]: that grew up being told
[Guest]: that Hindi films...
[Guest]: People who like Hindi films
[Guest]: and Hindi film songs
[Guest]: are definitely, like, uncool.
[Guest]: So, Hindi film music was not cool
[Guest]: the way it is now normal for people.
[Guest]: But my grandfather
[Guest]: was a music director in films.
[Guest]: I mean, he was
[Guest]: a very famous film composer.
[Amit Varma]: What was his name?
[Amit Varma]: Anil Biswas.
[Amit Varma]: Oh!
[Guest]: God, you are his granddaughter.
[Guest]: I am his...
[Amit Varma]: He was my nana.
[Guest]: I will ask you to sing
[Guest]: at the end of this interview.
[Guest]: And in fact,
[Guest]: Badli Teri Nazar To Nazare Badal Gaye
[Unknown]: is a line from one of the songs
[Unknown]: he composed.
[Guest]: So, and my grandmother
[Guest]: was an actress
[Guest]: and she was a film producer later.
[Guest]: So, my uncle
[Guest]: was also a music director.
[Guest]: So, I lived in a house
[Guest]: which was full of Hindi film songs.
[Guest]: We listened to the radio.
[Guest]: My father loved music.
[Guest]: He was of the generation
[Guest]: that gets educated in Urdu,
[Guest]: not Hindi.
[Guest]: So, he couldn't even
[Guest]: write his own name in Hindi.
[Guest]: But there was all this, like,
[Guest]: Urdu poetry also in the house
[Guest]: and Begum Akhtar also in the house
[Guest]: and Hindi film songs also.
[Guest]: Some porno books
[Amit Varma]: that I didn't follow
[Amit Varma]: the Roman Empire.
[Amit Varma]: Which you were spanked for finding.
[Amit Varma]: Why should anyone
[Guest]: get spanked for finding it?
[Guest]: As well as they are 7 years old
[Guest]: and reading porno, I don't know.
[Guest]: Like, they shouldn't get spanked.
[Guest]: I don't agree with that.
[Guest]: But, yeah.
[Guest]: Would that change your whole life?
[Guest]: Yes, well, agents of wish.
[Guest]: But the thing is,
[Guest]: so, I think that
[Guest]: it was just normal
[Guest]: to enjoy.
[Guest]: Playing Antakshari
[Guest]: was a big thing you did.
[Guest]: So, it was funny for me
[Guest]: that the thing
[Guest]: which you liked to do
[Guest]: most of the time,
[Guest]: you then pretend
[Guest]: to other people
[Guest]: that you don't do.
[Guest]: This, I did find strange.
[Guest]: Plus, it really was
[Guest]: my family thing.
[Guest]: I recently interviewed
[Guest]: Raveena Tandon
[Guest]: for something.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: one of the things she said
[Guest]: is that, well,
[Guest]: I went to, like, Jamnabai
[Guest]: and there everybody
[Guest]: was like, Hindi film.
[Guest]: Eww.
[Guest]: But that's the world
[Guest]: I came from.
[Guest]: So, they looked down on me.
[Guest]: But I was like,
[Guest]: what's wrong with it?
[Guest]: So, I feel like this idea
[Guest]: was always strange to me.
[Guest]: But, I remember
[Guest]: when I started working
[Guest]: for Anant,
[Guest]: that one day
[Guest]: I was sent to
[Guest]: some film studio
[Guest]: and there was
[Guest]: some recording
[Guest]: of some film
[Guest]: going on.
[Guest]: And I asked,
[Guest]: it's a new film
[Guest]: called Ramgad Ke Sholay.
[Guest]: Basically,
[Guest]: it will be all these
[Guest]: duplicate actors
[Guest]: who are going to play Sholay
[Guest]: but as the copies
[Guest]: and it's a parody.
[Guest]: So, I came back
[Guest]: and I was like,
[Guest]: there's going to be
[Guest]: this movie called
[Guest]: Ramgad Ke Sholay
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: I saw Amrish Puri
[Amit Varma]: in the studio today
[Amit Varma]: and something.
[Amit Varma]: And everybody was like,
[Guest]: what's with this chick?
[Guest]: Like, why is she so
[Guest]: into all this?
[Guest]: So, they were not
[Guest]: into that thing
[Guest]: but obviously,
[Guest]: the coming of
[Guest]: television
[Guest]: and, like,
[Guest]: post-liberalization
[Guest]: cultures
[Guest]: brought all this out
[Guest]: and I was in the
[Guest]: lucky position
[Guest]: when I wrote
[Guest]: Flashback of
[Guest]: being a person
[Guest]: who knew
[Guest]: Hindi film songs
[Guest]: but who also knew
[Guest]: Indo-Western combo
[Guest]: to be able to
[Guest]: succeed in media
[Guest]: at that time
[Guest]: and I think
[Guest]: I did have it.
[Guest]: So, it was a lucky thing
[Guest]: but most people
[Guest]: who were like me
[Guest]: were not working
[Guest]: in that programming place.
[Amit Varma]: You know,
[Guest]: they used to work
[Unknown]: in promos
[Unknown]: if you remember.
[Guest]: So, the cooler people
[Guest]: were still in promos
[Guest]: and the slightly
[Guest]: uncool people
[Guest]: were writing all this
[Amit Varma]: Hindi film music
[Amit Varma]: based programming
[Amit Varma]: but I was in that
[Amit Varma]: uncool place
[Guest]: as always.
[Guest]: But it was a bit
[Guest]: cooler than in my time.
[Guest]: So, I think that,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: people didn't like it
[Guest]: and of course,
[Guest]: because I,
[Guest]: in my house,
[Guest]: there wasn't a difference
[Guest]: made between poetry
[Guest]: and Hindi film songs.
[Guest]: People liked both
[Guest]: and they seemed
[Guest]: to be at ease with it.
[Guest]: So, I may have
[Guest]: inherited that.
[Guest]: But also,
[Guest]: I don't,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I do think that
[Guest]: there is something
[Guest]: different about the fact
[Guest]: that I don't just enjoy it.
[Guest]: I obviously also
[Guest]: look at it critically
[Guest]: but not in the sense
[Guest]: of criticizing it
[Guest]: but I see something
[Guest]: happening in it.
[Guest]: I'm not sure
[Guest]: how that started
[Guest]: to happen
[Guest]: but I would credit
[Guest]: Nandini Ramnath
[Guest]: with making me think about it
[Guest]: in a more formal way
[Guest]: because she and I
[Guest]: would often discuss things
[Guest]: and she would be like,
[Guest]: I really like what you said
[Guest]: about that
[Guest]: or that's really interesting
[Guest]: or something.
[Guest]: Some of it,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: it came from my irritation
[Guest]: with all the left liberals
[Guest]: who are older than me
[Guest]: who were like saying,
[Guest]: this is regressive culture.
[Guest]: All of Hindi film music
[Guest]: and new stuff,
[Guest]: Govinda is aggressive,
[Guest]: this one is aggressive
[Guest]: and my feeling was
[Guest]: not really,
[Amit Varma]: you have a class snobbery
[Amit Varma]: thing going on here.
[Amit Varma]: Govinda is bloody amazing.
[Guest]: But, you know,
[Guest]: people felt many things.
[Guest]: There was misogyny as well,
[Guest]: of course,
[Guest]: as you're rightly pointing out
[Guest]: but there was also
[Guest]: many interesting
[Guest]: class settings
[Guest]: and it was just
[Guest]: the creativity
[Guest]: of the writing
[Guest]: and the exuberance
[Guest]: of popular culture
[Guest]: which I loved
[Guest]: and every time
[Guest]: somebody fishes out
[Guest]: their guitar
[Guest]: and starts singing
[Guest]: Bob Dylan's song,
[Guest]: I start breaking out
[Guest]: in hives.
[Amit Varma]: So this thing that,
[Amit Varma]: I used to hate boys
[Amit Varma]: who like Pink Floyd,
[Amit Varma]: for example.
[Amit Varma]: I know you like Pink Floyd.
[Amit Varma]: Not that I don't like Dylan
[Guest]: but this kind of canon
[Guest]: of what is great.
[Amit Varma]: So I think
[Unknown]: and I remember
[Guest]: the Simi Garewal show
[Guest]: which everybody
[Guest]: loved to hate
[Guest]: but which I loved
[Guest]: and I think
[Guest]: my reasons for loving it
[Guest]: was solid,
[Guest]: really good interviews,
[Guest]: people talking about
[Guest]: their personal lives,
[Guest]: you never got that anywhere.
[Guest]: Like Abhishek Bachchan
[Guest]: or thinking about
[Guest]: being single,
[Guest]: Raveena Tandon
[Guest]: talking about her
[Guest]: adopting these two girls,
[Guest]: her heartbreak,
[Guest]: Dev Anand talking
[Guest]: about his relationship
[Guest]: with his ex-wife,
[Guest]: you never got that
[Guest]: anywhere.
[Guest]: Dev Anand talking about
[Guest]: his relationship with Surya
[Guest]: and how he could never
[Guest]: really love anybody after.
[Guest]: Like you never got
[Guest]: this kind of conversation
[Guest]: anywhere else.
[Guest]: She was small C
[Guest]: but she was also
[Guest]: all of these things, right?
[Guest]: And so I would be talking
[Guest]: to Nandini Ramnath about it
[Guest]: and then she started
[Guest]: asking me to write pieces,
[Guest]: longer pieces about it
[Guest]: for Time Out.
[Guest]: I thought,
[Guest]: really?
[Guest]: You think?
[Guest]: So I wrote a piece
[Guest]: about Himesh Trishamiya
[Guest]: then I wrote a piece
[Guest]: about Simi Garewal.
[Guest]: So these were things
[Amit Varma]: people didn't take seriously.
[Amit Varma]: What was your take on Himesh?
[Guest]: I coined a good term
[Guest]: for him,
[Guest]: his him-ness.
[Guest]: But you know,
[Guest]: I saw his popularity
[Guest]: in a structural way.
[Guest]: It's not like I was a fan,
[Guest]: but I could see that
[Guest]: around that time
[Guest]: I wrote a television series
[Guest]: about the business of Bollywood
[Guest]: for a business channel
[Guest]: and that would help me
[Guest]: to see that,
[Guest]: okay, he has these hooks
[Guest]: and his music allows you
[Guest]: to make dance steps
[Guest]: that are hooks.
[Guest]: So this is the early
[Guest]: version of virality.
[Guest]: Like it's very quick
[Guest]: to catch on.
[Guest]: And at the same time
[Guest]: he kind of comes
[Guest]: from the legacy of Altaf Raja
[Guest]: into a more remixed idea.
[Guest]: That's why he's very popular
[Guest]: with auto rickshaw drivers.
[Guest]: You know, so it's kind of
[Guest]: the end of T-series
[Guest]: and the coming of something new,
[Guest]: a different Indo-Western fusion
[Guest]: from what happened
[Guest]: immediately post-liberalization
[Guest]: that he's offering.
[Guest]: And this Urdufication,
[Guest]: I used to call it.
[Guest]: Like he only had a repertoire
[Guest]: of about six Urdu words
[Guest]: and he would use them
[Guest]: liberally in the songs.
[Guest]: So you get that old
[Guest]: Altaf Raja punk
[Guest]: or that vibe,
[Guest]: but with this Moroccan beats.
[Guest]: So it allows many
[Guest]: different populations
[Guest]: to enter it
[Guest]: and participate in it.
[Guest]: And it creates this virality
[Guest]: of the dance step
[Guest]: and the repetitive hook, etc.
[Guest]: And then there was
[Guest]: all the other fantastic thing
[Guest]: like the village,
[Guest]: which thought that
[Guest]: if you sang Jhalak Dikhla Aaja,
[Guest]: you would get possessed
[Amit Varma]: by a ghost.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, can you believe it?
[Amit Varma]: Like when you said
[Guest]: Ek baar aaja, aaja, aaja, aaja,
[Guest]: and the ghost used to enter you.
[Guest]: So there was a village
[Guest]: in Gujarat which was,
[Guest]: you were not allowed
[Unknown]: to sing those songs.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: So, I mean,
[Guest]: there was all of this,
[Guest]: like, you know,
[Guest]: this kind of cultural material
[Guest]: that floats around
[Guest]: and you listen
[Guest]: and you think like,
[Guest]: what does it tell you
[Guest]: about what people are feeling?
[Guest]: And what does it tell you
[Guest]: about how the world
[Guest]: is changing around us?
[Guest]: And it was,
[Guest]: it was, it's like being
[Guest]: in a playground, right?
[Guest]: Because you go in there
[Guest]: and you're seeing
[Guest]: all these things
[Guest]: and you're like,
[Guest]: oh, this is what it means.
[Guest]: Oh, this is what it means.
[Guest]: And that's exciting.
[Guest]: So I think that's
[Guest]: what I felt about it.
[Guest]: Over time, of course, yeah,
[Guest]: it's all the things.
[Guest]: It's trusting what I loved.
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan always,
[Guest]: people always made fun
[Guest]: of me for that.
[Guest]: You know, he can't act
[Guest]: and I'm like,
[Guest]: what a kind of like
[Guest]: dumb ass thing to say.
[Amit Varma]: He can't act.
[Amit Varma]: That's bullshit.
[Guest]: First, I mean,
[Guest]: come on.
[Guest]: Please.
[Amit Varma]: We should take this outside.
[Amit Varma]: Outside, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I feel like that's
[Amit Varma]: bringing realism
[Amit Varma]: into fantasy, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like people don't love
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan for his acting.
[Guest]: They love him for something
[Guest]: else he unlocks in us.
[Guest]: So I think that's
[Guest]: what I felt about it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I feel like that's
[Guest]: bringing realism
[Guest]: into fantasy, right?
[Guest]: Like people don't love
[Guest]: Shah Rukh Khan for his acting.
[Guest]: So I think that making
[Guest]: sense of cinema
[Guest]: in a literal way,
[Guest]: and especially
[Guest]: with popular culture,
[Guest]: it's a very stupid
[Guest]: thing to do.
[Guest]: Popular culture
[Guest]: is all about sensation
[Guest]: and how we feel things.
[Guest]: So it allows us
[Guest]: to feel things fully.
[Amit Varma]: It overtakes us.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think is
[Amit Varma]: the way I am judging
[Amit Varma]: Shah Rukh as a bad actor
[Amit Varma]: and the way I might
[Amit Varma]: look down on some
[Amit Varma]: popular cinema
[Amit Varma]: is valid from
[Amit Varma]: its frame of reference,
[Amit Varma]: but that frame of reference
[Amit Varma]: is inapplicable
[Amit Varma]: because these films
[Guest]: are not trying to do that.
[Guest]: They're not.
[Guest]: Their enterprise
[Guest]: is completely different.
[Guest]: Sure.
[Guest]: So you can't really
[Guest]: bring that lens to it.
[Guest]: But I also feel
[Guest]: there's a squeamishness
[Guest]: about simple pleasure,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Bodily pleasure
[Guest]: is a problem for people.
[Guest]: Later on,
[Guest]: it became fashionable
[Guest]: to write about
[Guest]: popular culture,
[Guest]: but it's written about
[Guest]: in a fairly
[Guest]: loveless fashion.
[Guest]: No longer.
[Guest]: I think there are
[Guest]: new writers.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: other writers
[Guest]: who are doing
[Guest]: really interesting
[Guest]: work on Bollywood now,
[Guest]: Hindi films,
[Guest]: whatever.
[Guest]: But yeah,
[Guest]: for a long time.
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: that's what
[Guest]: they wanted to do
[Guest]: in a film,
[Guest]: the way they represented
[Guest]: queerness,
[Guest]: the way they allowed
[Guest]: sex to be present,
[Guest]: the voice that they gave
[Guest]: to women,
[Guest]: to emotion,
[Guest]: which is completely
[Guest]: lacking in our cinema
[Guest]: right now.
[Guest]: And I feel
[Guest]: that's part of the success
[Guest]: of a film like Abish Singh
[Guest]: that it is so much
[Guest]: about emotion
[Guest]: that it's the only place
[Guest]: that people are getting
[Guest]: to talk about feelings.
[Guest]: So whatever its problems
[Guest]: might be,
[Guest]: they're clinging to that,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: So I feel by removing
[Guest]: songs from films,
[Guest]: which gave some expression
[Guest]: to our feelings as well.
[Guest]: So I think
[Guest]: the playback song itself
[Guest]: as a thing,
[Guest]: that the voice
[Guest]: and the person
[Guest]: are two different people.
[Guest]: It's itself
[Guest]: such a queer idea.
[Guest]: I know it,
[Guest]: but I accept it.
[Guest]: It's a fiction.
[Unknown]: I know the reality,
[Guest]: but I accept
[Guest]: the fiction as real,
[Guest]: you know?
[Guest]: I know
[Guest]: that it's
[Guest]: Lata Mangeshkar's voice,
[Guest]: Nutan's voice.
[Guest]: Unless it's Himesh
[Guest]: who's acting
[Guest]: in the film.
[Amit Varma]: No,
[Amit Varma]: if it's Himesh,
[Guest]: then Himesh takes
[Guest]: over everything.
[Amit Varma]: He's him-less.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah,
[Guest]: he is the fiction
[Guest]: and the nonfiction.
[Guest]: So he erases the actor
[Guest]: in a certain sense,
[Guest]: and that is why
[Guest]: he tried to become
[Guest]: an actor eventually.
[Guest]: But yeah,
[Guest]: so I think like
[Guest]: there is a lot of complexity
[Guest]: in popular culture,
[Guest]: which is poetic,
[Guest]: which speaks to us,
[Guest]: which says something
[Guest]: about subterranean parts
[Guest]: of ourselves.
[Guest]: And I found it
[Guest]: a great way
[Guest]: to understand life.
[Guest]: I'm not saying
[Guest]: to understand society
[Guest]: as if I'm something outside it.
[Guest]: I feel it's a great way
[Amit Varma]: to understand life
[Amit Varma]: and who we are.
[Amit Varma]: So not just watching the film,
[Amit Varma]: but also saying that
[Amit Varma]: why am I reacting this way
[Amit Varma]: instinctively to this aspect
[Amit Varma]: of the film?
[Amit Varma]: And then that makes you
[Guest]: see the world differently.
[Guest]: So, you know,
[Guest]: Ulka Anjaria has written
[Guest]: this book called
[Guest]: Reading India Now.
[Guest]: And she's an academic.
[Guest]: And for about a year
[Guest]: while she was in India
[Guest]: on her sabbatical,
[Guest]: I would see her
[Guest]: at every talk that I gave
[Guest]: and every event
[Guest]: I was part of.
[Guest]: And I'm like,
[Guest]: wow, she's so culturally active.
[Guest]: She goes to everything.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, she's stalking me.
[Guest]: No, actually,
[Guest]: well, she kind of was
[Guest]: because a year later.
[Guest]: And then, you know,
[Guest]: I had drinks with her one day
[Guest]: and I asked her,
[Guest]: what are you working on?
[Guest]: And she said,
[Guest]: I'm working on contemporary culture
[Guest]: and Chetan Bhagat
[Guest]: and something and all of that.
[Guest]: I'm like, yeah, yeah,
[Guest]: sounds good.
[Guest]: But I didn't think about it
[Guest]: too much afterwards.
[Guest]: And about a year later,
[Guest]: she sent me a chapter
[Guest]: saying that there is a chapter
[Guest]: on your work in my book
[Guest]: and I wanted you to read it.
[Guest]: And I hope I'm not
[Guest]: misrepresented in any way.
[Guest]: And when I read the chapter,
[Guest]: I was halfway between
[Guest]: like ecstasy and tears
[Guest]: because I felt like
[Guest]: nobody had understood my...
[Guest]: First of all,
[Guest]: she has read everything
[Guest]: I've written,
[Guest]: which is a massive amount
[Guest]: of reading.
[Guest]: And she had seen
[Guest]: everything I've made
[Guest]: and understood
[Guest]: what I was trying to do,
[Guest]: which was fantastic.
[Guest]: And one of the things
[Guest]: that she wrote about
[Guest]: was my review of
[Guest]: Anarkali of Ara.
[Guest]: And she said,
[Guest]: it's the idea of the critic
[Guest]: as a lover
[Guest]: that you love the thing,
[Guest]: but you critique it
[Guest]: from a place of love,
[Guest]: not from a place of contempt,
[Guest]: which is what you were
[Guest]: talking about, right?
[Guest]: And so for me,
[Guest]: like when I saw
[Guest]: Anarkali of Ara,
[Guest]: I felt relief.
[Guest]: And I'm like,
[Guest]: why am I feeling so...
[Guest]: Like this feeling I had
[Guest]: at the end of the film
[Guest]: because, you know,
[Guest]: throughout the film,
[Guest]: I realized I'd been
[Guest]: holding my breath,
[Guest]: no matter what.
[Guest]: It's going to be like
[Guest]: that fucking film Pink,
[Guest]: where the men
[Guest]: will uplift the woman.
[Guest]: But that's not
[Guest]: what the film was.
[Guest]: The film was about her
[Guest]: just wanting to sing
[Guest]: and dance again.
[Guest]: It wasn't about
[Guest]: her wanting revenge.
[Guest]: She didn't even want to.
[Guest]: She just wanted to sing
[Guest]: and dance and wear
[Guest]: blingy clothes again.
[Guest]: She didn't want to be
[Guest]: only the moment
[Guest]: of sexual crime,
[Guest]: which people are
[Guest]: continuously reducing
[Guest]: women to, right?
[Guest]: You're the victim
[Guest]: of the crime
[Guest]: and you're nothing else.
[Guest]: So when she ends
[Guest]: with that thing
[Guest]: and I came out
[Guest]: and I was like,
[Guest]: this is a film
[Guest]: made for people like me
[Guest]: who want to say yes,
[Guest]: who it's not only
[Guest]: about no means no,
[Guest]: it's also about
[Guest]: yes means yes
[Guest]: when I want to,
[Guest]: not when you want to,
[Guest]: which is something
[Guest]: totally missing in our films.
[Guest]: So the idea of
[Guest]: writing about something
[Guest]: because you see it as
[Guest]: enabling,
[Guest]: important,
[Guest]: vibrant,
[Guest]: I think that is
[Guest]: a critical place
[Guest]: that we don't feel enough,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And the way that
[Guest]: I relate to popular culture
[Guest]: is really to look at
[Guest]: what it enables,
[Amit Varma]: not what it disables.
[Amit Varma]: So the natural follow-up
[Amit Varma]: question to that,
[Amit Varma]: which has two parts to that
[Amit Varma]: and one is cliched,
[Amit Varma]: but the other may
[Amit Varma]: maybe slightly less
[Amit Varma]: is in your time,
[Amit Varma]: in the time that you've been
[Amit Varma]: writing and working
[Amit Varma]: the last 30 something years,
[Amit Varma]: one,
[Amit Varma]: how has popular culture changed?
[Amit Varma]: Or rather,
[Amit Varma]: that's a question.
[Amit Varma]: There are two parts to it.
[Amit Varma]: How has popular culture changed?
[Amit Varma]: One,
[Amit Varma]: in a general sense of,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: you think of,
[Amit Varma]: for example,
[Amit Varma]: the market for entertainment
[Amit Varma]: and as society changes,
[Amit Varma]: you imagine popular culture
[Amit Varma]: will change
[Amit Varma]: and how much of that
[Amit Varma]: has happened
[Amit Varma]: and what does it reflect?
[Amit Varma]: And a part two of the question
[Amit Varma]: is that Bollywood
[Amit Varma]: is often like
[Amit Varma]: governance,
[Amit Varma]: in fact,
[Amit Varma]: driven by the elites,
[Amit Varma]: that you have a few
[Amit Varma]: privileged elites
[Amit Varma]: and a few structures
[Amit Varma]: and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: most new actors
[Amit Varma]: who come in
[Amit Varma]: are coming in
[Amit Varma]: because they're the son
[Amit Varma]: or daughter of someone
[Amit Varma]: and blah blah blah
[Amit Varma]: and you have these
[Amit Varma]: big families
[Amit Varma]: ruling over the thing
[Amit Varma]: and what I find interesting
[Amit Varma]: is that to a certain extent,
[Amit Varma]: these elites are
[Amit Varma]: driving the change.
[Amit Varma]: So when I look at a film
[Amit Varma]: like, say,
[Amit Varma]: Kapoor and Sons,
[Amit Varma]: which has come out of,
[Amit Varma]: I think,
[Amit Varma]: the Karan Johar stable
[Amit Varma]: and I'm thinking,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: gayness is such a
[Amit Varma]: natural,
[Amit Varma]: normal thing
[Amit Varma]: but is it happening
[Amit Varma]: this way
[Amit Varma]: because the elites
[Amit Varma]: are more,
[Amit Varma]: so to say,
[Amit Varma]: with it
[Amit Varma]: or have,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: progressed further
[Amit Varma]: than the rest of society.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I don't know if I'm being
[Guest]: very coherent but...
[Guest]: I don't think the elites
[Guest]: have progressed,
[Unknown]: first of all.
[Guest]: I think the elites
[Guest]: can often be more conservative
[Amit Varma]: than many other parts
[Amit Varma]: of society
[Amit Varma]: but that's also
[Guest]: not really fair.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I look at things like
[Guest]: Kapoor and Sons
[Guest]: but I like
[Amit Varma]: Four More Shorts,
[Guest]: please.
[Guest]: Because I feel
[Guest]: Made in Heaven
[Guest]: is very Bhadur Lok
[Amit Varma]: and it's like a very
[Guest]: nationalist kind of thing.
[Guest]: But it's got
[Amit Varma]: this very national...
[Amit Varma]: I meant the aspect
[Amit Varma]: of showing
[Amit Varma]: gayness in a very
[Guest]: natural way
[Guest]: and not in a caricature
[Guest]: sort of...
[Guest]: Gayness in a natural way
[Unknown]: also has become
[Unknown]: a kind of
[Guest]: liberal calling.
[Guest]: Clich.
[Guest]: Clich, yeah.
[Guest]: So I will get tea
[Guest]: but it's still there
[Guest]: for its issue
[Guest]: to an extent
[Guest]: and Made in Heaven
[Guest]: takes a lot of
[Guest]: its power
[Guest]: from the juicy
[Guest]: personal dynamics
[Guest]: as from its
[Guest]: very worthy
[Guest]: kind of interest
[Guest]: in social issues.
[Guest]: It's like 10 episodes
[Guest]: of one social topic
[Guest]: after the other.
[Guest]: Whereas Four More Shorts,
[Guest]: please, is about four girls
[Guest]: who want to have sex,
[Guest]: make money and
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: solve their emotional life.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm with that.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't actually seen it.
[Guest]: I'm going to go back
[Amit Varma]: and watch it.
[Amit Varma]: You may not like it.
[Amit Varma]: It's a bit trashy
[Amit Varma]: but I was like with it.
[Guest]: How dare you say
[Guest]: I don't like trashy things.
[Guest]: I'm called the Govinda
[Guest]: of podcasting for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Control yourself.
[Guest]: The podcast is three hours long
[Amit Varma]: and it's a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, if I made it
[Guest]: five hours long
[Guest]: they'd call me
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: the Bela Tower
[Guest]: of podcasting.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: It's all about size.
[Guest]: So the thing is that
[Guest]: I feel that
[Guest]: Bollywood first
[Guest]: if we're talking
[Guest]: about popular culture
[Guest]: it's not only Bollywood.
[Guest]: But Bollywood
[Guest]: at first
[Guest]: was like
[Guest]: full of people
[Guest]: who are not elites.
[Guest]: There were elites
[Guest]: of course,
[Guest]: Devakarani and all
[Guest]: there were Brahmins
[Guest]: there were upper caste people
[Guest]: but there were a lot
[Guest]: of Muslims
[Guest]: there were a lot
[Guest]: of Anglo-Indian women
[Guest]: there were a lot of
[Guest]: melting pot feeling
[Guest]: about Bollywood
[Guest]: early on.
[Guest]: And then of course
[Guest]: families start
[Guest]: to come in
[Guest]: and studios
[Guest]: and systems
[Guest]: and privileges form.
[Guest]: It was always very
[Guest]: driven by those camps
[Guest]: but in its
[Guest]: content
[Guest]: also
[Guest]: it represented
[Guest]: a far more diverse
[Guest]: world than
[Guest]: today's Bollywood
[Guest]: does.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Which is to say
[Guest]: you had working class people
[Guest]: you had queer people
[Guest]: not being gay
[Guest]: in that accepted sense
[Guest]: but you had
[Guest]: a lot of queer presence.
[Guest]: If you look at older
[Guest]: kind of men
[Guest]: who are singing
[Guest]: those Kavadis
[Guest]: you see queer presence
[Guest]: in a very much
[Guest]: more potent
[Guest]: because it's not
[Guest]: been neatly
[Guest]: you know like
[Guest]: politically correctly
[Guest]: presented.
[Guest]: Now both things
[Guest]: have a different power
[Guest]: is what I'm saying.
[Guest]: I'm not saying
[Guest]: one is better than the other
[Guest]: but it's not necessarily
[Guest]: a linear progression
[Guest]: of one progressiveness
[Guest]: and then
[Guest]: it's getting better
[Guest]: and better.
[Guest]: But I think
[Guest]: what's
[Guest]: what's happened
[Guest]: the significant change
[Guest]: in popular culture
[Guest]: is in fact
[Guest]: I don't think
[Guest]: it's the same
[Guest]: in the rest of India.
[Guest]: It has been
[Guest]: excessively corporatized
[Guest]: it works
[Guest]: excessively by
[Guest]: corporate logics
[Guest]: which means
[Guest]: it works by
[Guest]: playing the numbers
[Guest]: not really by
[Guest]: the slightly
[Amit Varma]: maverick quality
[Amit Varma]: of creativity.
[Guest]: I agree
[Guest]: so there's no imagination.
[Guest]: Yeah
[Guest]: so it's not potent
[Guest]: it's not risk taking
[Guest]: you know
[Guest]: it's a fairly
[Guest]: risk averse
[Guest]: kind of space
[Guest]: creatively
[Guest]: from time to time
[Guest]: you'll see something
[Guest]: but not really
[Guest]: and people don't back
[Guest]: the risky thing
[Guest]: it plays out in
[Guest]: all the worlds
[Guest]: that we have
[Guest]: but
[Guest]: digital
[Guest]: I mean
[Amit Varma]: TikTok
[Amit Varma]: I was just going to
[Amit Varma]: come to TikTok
[Amit Varma]: because I have this
[Amit Varma]: feeling that
[Guest]: this is one thing
[Guest]: you and I could bond over
[Guest]: we could sit and
[Guest]: watch TikTok together
[Guest]: but the thing is
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: why I don't watch
[Guest]: a lot of TikTok
[Guest]: but the power
[Guest]: of TikTok is
[Guest]: it has overturned
[Guest]: the logic of celebrity
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: I no longer
[Guest]: need Ranveer Singh
[Guest]: because I am
[Guest]: Ranveer Singh
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: TikTok can have
[Guest]: million followers
[Guest]: like that
[Guest]: you don't need English
[Guest]: you don't need literacy
[Guest]: even
[Guest]: you just need to know
[Guest]: how to make a great
[Guest]: 20 second clip
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: so what is it doing
[Guest]: it is actually
[Guest]: making popular culture
[Unknown]: folk culture again
[Guest]: yeah
[Guest]: this division of
[Guest]: culture into folk
[Guest]: and not folk
[Guest]: is a colonial division
[Guest]: but actually
[Guest]: folk culture was
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: and Bollywood
[Guest]: is a kind of
[Guest]: urban folk
[Guest]: that's all it was
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: you have all these
[Guest]: great Shahis
[Guest]: I mean
[Guest]: one of the reasons
[Guest]: I used a Lavani
[Guest]: to make a film
[Guest]: about consent
[Guest]: for Agents of Ishq
[Guest]: was because
[Guest]: I looked at Lavani
[Guest]: and I was like
[Guest]: oh my god
[Guest]: this is so sexy
[Guest]: and it's so clever
[Guest]: a form
[Guest]: and it will allow me
[Guest]: to say something
[Guest]: fairly didactic
[Guest]: without being didactic
[Guest]: because it is totally
[Guest]: rooted in lived experience
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: it's an experiential form
[Guest]: actually
[Guest]: so you've always had
[Guest]: multiple folk
[Guest]: and pop cultures
[Guest]: I won't say folk
[Guest]: multiple popular cultures
[Guest]: have existed
[Guest]: but the corporatization
[Guest]: in Punjab
[Guest]: Bollywood was not
[Guest]: a big factor there
[Guest]: because pop music
[Amit Varma]: is the main
[Amit Varma]: popular culture
[Amit Varma]: and south people
[Amit Varma]: listening to this
[Guest]: will be so pissed off
[Guest]: at me because
[Guest]: they're like
[Guest]: what Bollywood is not
[Guest]: yeah what are you
[Guest]: talking about
[Guest]: so but I'm saying
[Guest]: even the big
[Guest]: big film
[Guest]: producing states
[Guest]: or regions
[Amit Varma]: right
[Guest]: so yes maybe
[Guest]: Tamil movies
[Guest]: are very big
[Guest]: but nevertheless
[Guest]: movie production
[Guest]: is very corporatized
[Guest]: it is corporatized
[Guest]: although there is
[Guest]: much more inventiveness
[Guest]: in the big
[Guest]: film producing culture
[Guest]: you have a lot
[Guest]: more inventiveness
[Guest]: more relationship
[Guest]: with the audience
[Guest]: what corporatization
[Guest]: does is it severs
[Amit Varma]: the relationship
[Amit Varma]: between audience
[Amit Varma]: and creator
[Amit Varma]: and not just that
[Amit Varma]: what you know
[Amit Varma]: the fact also remains
[Amit Varma]: is that because of
[Guest]: technology and the
[Amit Varma]: internet today
[Amit Varma]: anyone in the country
[Guest]: can see Malayalam
[Guest]: films and get
[Guest]: inspired by them
[Guest]: exactly
[Guest]: which would not
[Guest]: have been the case
[Guest]: 20 years ago
[Guest]: you're reaching
[Guest]: the long tail
[Guest]: but I think that
[Guest]: has been incorporated
[Guest]: into the everyday
[Guest]: practice of life
[Guest]: now we have done it
[Guest]: again
[Guest]: there are moments
[Guest]: you know I also
[Guest]: know that
[Guest]: facetiously when we
[Guest]: would do Diwali puja
[Guest]: since we are a
[Guest]: most untraditional
[Guest]: family
[Guest]: we would sing
[Guest]: some filmy kind
[Guest]: of prayer song
[Guest]: like
[Guest]: so the way in
[Guest]: which popular
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: and the fact
[Guest]: that many people
[Guest]: sing bhajans
[Guest]: which are based
[Guest]: on filmy tunes
[Guest]: so we have
[Guest]: always had that
[Guest]: mixture of everyday
[Guest]: life and popular
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: which is not
[Guest]: real
[Guest]: but actually
[Guest]: being the only
[Guest]: spokesperson
[Guest]: creating a binary
[Guest]: of culture
[Guest]: in a sense
[Guest]: it has lived
[Guest]: its day
[Guest]: and that is why
[Guest]: today when people
[Guest]: say why aren't
[Guest]: Bollywood stars
[Guest]: saying something
[Guest]: about politics
[Amit Varma]: I'm like
[Amit Varma]: who cares
[Amit Varma]: have some pity
[Amit Varma]: on them
[Guest]: because they
[Guest]: can't in a way
[Amit Varma]: and one of the
[Amit Varma]: really popular
[Amit Varma]: hashtags on
[Amit Varma]: tiktok if you
[Amit Varma]: remember
[Guest]: was the onions
[Guest]: I would say
[Amit Varma]: a lot of popular
[Amit Varma]: tiktok is extremely
[Guest]: misogynist as well
[Guest]: which our society is
[Guest]: but we are also
[Guest]: seeing all these
[Amit Varma]: grannies and
[Guest]: so many people
[Guest]: doing like
[Amit Varma]: cartwheels
[Amit Varma]: grannies doing
[Amit Varma]: and so many
[Guest]: women with channels
[Guest]: of their own
[Guest]: and millions of
[Guest]: followers
[Guest]: and also
[Guest]: I met this
[Guest]: woman
[Guest]: I keep forgetting
[Guest]: her name
[Guest]: but she is
[Guest]: very well
[Guest]: known on
[Guest]: tiktok
[Guest]: she used to
[Guest]: do motivational
[Guest]: videos
[Guest]: on tiktok
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: English is so
[Guest]: good
[Guest]: can't you
[Guest]: teach us
[Guest]: English on
[Amit Varma]: tiktok
[Amit Varma]: so she started
[Guest]: doing conversational
[Guest]: English videos
[Guest]: on tiktok
[Guest]: and she has a
[Guest]: huge following
[Guest]: so I also
[Guest]: think
[Guest]: this response
[Guest]: apparently in a
[Guest]: couple of
[Guest]: weeks she had
[Guest]: some million
[Guest]: followers
[Guest]: but the
[Guest]: relationship
[Unknown]: between audience
[Unknown]: and creator
[Guest]: is what
[Guest]: digital has
[Guest]: become
[Guest]: so
[Guest]: I think
[Guest]: it's
[Guest]: an
[Guest]: exciting
[Guest]: moment
[Guest]: for popular
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: and I
[Guest]: would say
[Guest]: even for
[Guest]: myself
[Guest]: something
[Guest]: that I
[Amit Varma]: could do
[Amit Varma]: with
[Guest]: unlimited
[Guest]: girls
[Guest]: because of
[Guest]: the coming
[Guest]: of digital
[Guest]: culture
[Guest]: make a
[Guest]: film
[Guest]: that didn't
[Guest]: look like
[Guest]: any film
[Guest]: before
[Guest]: it cost
[Guest]: less
[Amit Varma]: it was
[Amit Varma]: in my
[Amit Varma]: hands
[Guest]: I could
[Guest]: buy my
[Guest]: own
[Amit Varma]: camera
[Amit Varma]: this is a
[Guest]: moment for
[Guest]: you to
[Guest]: announce
[Guest]: your tiktok
[Amit Varma]: channel
[Amit Varma]: I am
[Amit Varma]: going to
[Amit Varma]: start one
[Amit Varma]: soon right
[Guest]: after this
[Guest]: podcast
[Guest]: done oh
[Guest]: my god
[Guest]: amazing
[Guest]: so yeah
[Guest]: if that
[Guest]: happens
[Guest]: I will
[Guest]: obviously
[Guest]: do it
[Guest]: but you
[Guest]: know we
[Guest]: don't have
[Guest]: to worry
[Amit Varma]: too much
[Amit Varma]: about
[Amit Varma]: bollywood's
[Amit Varma]: badness
[Amit Varma]: because it's
[Amit Varma]: not that
[Amit Varma]: important anymore
[Amit Varma]: so we
[Amit Varma]: have now
[Amit Varma]: this episode
[Amit Varma]: has reached
[Amit Varma]: that stage
[Amit Varma]: of self
[Amit Varma]: loathing
[Amit Varma]: where I'm
[Amit Varma]: hating on
[Amit Varma]: myself
[Amit Varma]: for having
[Amit Varma]: an amazing
[Amit Varma]: guest but
[Amit Varma]: not enough
[Amit Varma]: time to
[Amit Varma]: do justice
[Amit Varma]: to her
[Amit Varma]: so
[Amit Varma]: it's
[Amit Varma]: time
[Amit Varma]: for
[Amit Varma]: you to
[Amit Varma]: start
[Amit Varma]: a new
[Amit Varma]: journey
[Amit Varma]: and
[Amit Varma]: I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: this
[Amit Varma]: journey
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: going to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: journey
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: going to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: journey
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: going
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: it
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: going
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: journey
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: now
[Guest]: and
[Guest]: I'm
[Guest]: going
[Guest]: to
[Guest]: start
[Guest]: this
[Guest]: journey
[Guest]: right
[Guest]: Indian sexual lives. As soon as we started, however, it kind of blew up for us because
[Guest]: people started writing saying, I also want to write a story, and I have an experience I want
[Guest]: to share, and I also want to be an agent of Ishq. And so now it has become actually a very co-created
[Guest]: kind of space where we make some things, but a lot of user-generated materials on the site
[Guest]: where people send in their narratives. We work with a huge number of really talented illustrators
[Guest]: and more and more keep getting added because people just write to us saying, I love your
[Guest]: stuff, and I also want to draw for you. So I think now Agents of Ishq has become that kind
[Guest]: of a community space where people are talking about sex and love in a very open, honest,
[Guest]: and thoughtful way. If you haven't seen it, please check it out, folks who are listening.
[Amit Varma]: Agentsofishq.com, the link, of course, will be on the show notes.
[Guest]: Yes. And also, I think one of the things we've done is a lot of cutting-edge work on consent,
[Guest]: like cutting edge in the world, because we made this Lavani about consent, which is, first of all,
[Guest]: very entertaining and awesome, but also because it said that consent is not just about the binary of
[Guest]: yes and no, but it's about yes, no, and maybe. And I do think that the maybe space is very important
[Guest]: generally as a feminist, because the idea that somebody will take time to decide is the most
[Amit Varma]: fearful thing for us all. In fact, one very evocative phrase I learned from you was a
[Guest]: garden of consent. Yes, the garden of consent.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a space where everything is fluid. It's not necessarily a yes or a no. And you've even,
[Amit Varma]: in a separate place, spoken about relationships and dating, for example, as more of an exploration.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not a goal-oriented thing, by end of first date, I must get to this base or that base.
[Amit Varma]: But you have to think of it as an open-ended exploration, which,
[Guest]: and there are so many modern anxieties. I mean, there'll be many people who'll
[Guest]: have the experience on Tinder of somebody not wanting to meet them unless sex is guaranteed.
[Guest]: And I have often said to such people that, you know, you may be worried whether I will sleep
[Guest]: with you or not, but how do you know you will want to sleep with me when you meet me? I mean,
[Guest]: it's a question not only about what you're getting from the other person, but thinking about what you
[Guest]: really want, which I think people don't do because they're so anxious about achieving that goal.
[Guest]: And there's a fantastic piece on agents of ish written by an Indian woman of Caribbean origin
[Guest]: called Flirting Without Agendas. And it's about appreciating each other,
[Guest]: not about flirting in order to get something, which is what you're saying the goal.
[Guest]: So I think like there are all of these very beautiful ideas that conform more to the way
[Guest]: that we actually wish to live life, if we may or may not always be living it that way,
[Guest]: that I think makes it also, it's an important project, I think, because it dares to say many
[Guest]: things that people feel, but are scared to say out loud. And it could not have been done without
[Guest]: the very strong feminist grounding that it has, right? So it centers the experience of women
[Guest]: and queer people first. Men are not the center of the conversation. Their experiences are not
[Guest]: what drives the idea of what is liberation. Liberation is different for each person is
[Guest]: what we believe. And everybody's ability and possibility to define their own sexual journeys
[Guest]: is what qualifies as liberation. If you really, really feel you are monogamous, then you are
[Guest]: liberated if you live that life. And if you're really and truly polyamorous, you're liberated
[Guest]: if you can live that life, right? So there's no one liberation. I Love Latika is a project that I
[Guest]: did purely for pleasure and joy for myself. It's a digital interactive project where there is vine
[Guest]: with many, many different kinds of flowers and fruits. Many are not realistic. And when you
[Guest]: click on it, on any fruit, it opens, either it becomes a flower or it starts like oozing pulp
[Guest]: and many erotic things like that. And it plays a poem, an audio clip of a poem, which is an erotic
[Guest]: poem from an old one, a new one from different places in the world. So it's actually just that.
[Guest]: It's like a little room surrounded by a diaphanous curtain that you go into and you just look at all
[Guest]: these gorgeous and surreal flora and fauna and listen to erotic poems. And while watching people
[Guest]: play with the Love Latika, I felt very much that people love poetry. They don't know they love it
[Guest]: sometimes, but poetry should be read out and spoken so that people can develop a personal
[Guest]: relationship with it. It shouldn't only be in books, so it also should be in books. And also
[Guest]: that actually people, when reconnected with their erotic selves, become at home with themselves.
[Guest]: I really felt what you said at the beginning of our conversation, that people always think about
[Guest]: other people looking at them. So we never see anybody in a state of repose. Where they're
[Guest]: comfortable in their own skin. Yeah, at home with themselves, right? It's very rare. Everybody's
[Guest]: very conscious of being looked at today, even if it's only because they're taking selfies all the
[Guest]: time. But suddenly I saw people just immersed in themselves and it was beautiful. And some people
[Guest]: said I felt very vulnerable while being there. So that was all very delightful. Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: This is a moment, Paromita, when I am going to acknowledge my privilege because it's a great
[Amit Varma]: privilege talking to you. I mean, I've got so many insights and so much wisdom and so much to think
[Guest]: about from this conversation. Thank you for coming on the show.
[Guest]: No, thank you for having me and thank you for making this wonderful show.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this conversation, just follow all the links to Paromita's work
[Amit Varma]: on in the show notes. You can follow her on Twitter at Parodevi. If you like any of her work
[Amit Varma]: and I'm sure you love a lot of it, please amplify it. It deserves to have a much wider audience as
[Amit Varma]: you'll realize when say you watch Unlimited Girls or visit Agents of Fish. You can follow me on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of the Scene and the Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com. The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution. You can find out more about the public policy courses at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and don't be good tonight. Do something naughty.